George W. Bush
April 01, 2008

Remarks at a Luncheon Hosted by President Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine in Kiev
Madam Prime Minister, Mr. Chairman, distinguished guests, thank you for your warm welcome. Laura and I are honored to stand with you on Ukrainian soil, and we bring the greetings of the American people, or as you would say,Vitayu vas.
The people of Ukraine have made great contributions to the history of human freedom. During World War II, Ukrainian soldiers helped defeat the armies of fascism and end the deadliest conflict in history. And at the end of the cold war, Ukrainians formed an independent nation and declared your desire to live in freedom and peace.
In 2004, Ukrainians inspired the world with the Orange Revolution, using peaceful demonstrations to protect your right to choose your leaders. Today, Ukrainians are showing courage in helping to advance freedom in many parts of the world. You're helping to train security forces in Iraq, supporting a Provincial Reconstruction Team in Afghanistan. Ukrainians are part of the U.N. mission in Kosovo. Last month in Kosovo, a Ukrainian police officer gave his life and many others were wounded helping to defend the ideals of freedom.
Ukraine is contributing to every mission of the NATO alliance and honoring the ideals that unite the transatlantic community. This week, Ukraine seeks to strengthen its transatlantic ties through a NATO Membership Action Plan. The United States strongly supports your request. We are proud to stand with you in Bucharest and beyond.
Mr. President, our two nations share a common vision for the future. We seek to advance the cause of freedom and help all peoples of Europe live together in security and peace. With great confidence in that future, I offer a toast to you, to your gracious wife, and to a free and sovereign people of Ukraine.
NOTE: The President spoke at 11:57 a.m. at the Presidential Secretariat. In his remarks, he referred to Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko and Verkhovna Chairman Rada Yatseniuk Arseniy Petrovych of Ukraine; and Kateryna Mykhailivna Yushchenko, wife of President Yushchenko. The transcript released by the Office of the Press Secretary also included the remarks of President Yushchenko.