George W. Bush
April 21, 2008

Remarks Announcing the Reopening of the Mexican Consulate in New Orleans, Louisiana
President Bush.Thank you.Sientese, por favor. Mr. President, we are sure glad you're here.
President Felipe de Jesus Calderon Hinojosa of Mexico.Thank you, sir.
President Bush.And thank you for inviting me to be here. Madam Foreign Minister, Consul Garcia Guerra, Ambassador, thanks. Governor, el alcalde—Mr. Mayor, Ambassador Garza, I am really glad to be with you on this special occasion. I am pleased that Mexico has chosen to reopen its consulate in New Orleans, and I'm honored to attend.
New Orleans has had a long tradition of diplomatic ties with Mexico. In 1824, New Orleans, Louisiana, became the first site of the Mexican—where the first Mexican—became the site for the first Mexican consulate in the United States. Isn't that interesting? Unfortunately, the consulate was closed in 2002. And so today we're reopening the consulate. And it's a good sign, because we celebrate the values that cause Mexico and the United States to be friends, values like family and faith and culture.
We celebrate the enduring and close partnership between our countries. Mexico and the United States are working together to build a future of prosperity and opportunity for people on both sides of the border.
And at this ceremony, we also celebrate the comeback of a great American city. You know, I chose New Orleans for our meetings with Mexico and Canada because I wanted to send a clear signal to the people of my country that New Orleans is open for business, and it's a good place to visit, and that after the devastation of Katrina, it's become a hopeful city.
And so on behalf of the people of the United States, Mr. President,mi amigo,I thank you for reopening this consulate. I look forward to our meetings. And it's my honor to bring you to the podium.
NOTE: The President spoke at 1 p.m. In his remarks, he referred to Secretary of Foreign Relations Patricia Espinosa Cantellano and Consul Andrea Garcia Guerra of Mexico; Mexico's Ambassador to the U.S. Arturo Sarukhan Casamitjana; Gov. Piyush "Bobby" Jindal of Louisiana; and Mayor C. Ray Nagin of New Orleans, LA. The transcript released by the Office of the Press Secretary also included the remarks of President Calderon Hinojosa. The Office of the Press Secretary also released a Spanish language transcript of these remarks.