George W. Bush
December 12, 2002

Executive Order 13280—Responsibilities of the Department of Agriculture and the Agency for International Development With Respect to Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to help the Federal Government coordinate a national effort to expand opportunities for faith-based and other community organizations and to strengthen their capacity to better meet social needs in America's communities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment of Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives at the Department of Agriculture and the Agency for International Development. (a) The Secretary of Agriculture and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall each establish within their respective agencies a Center for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (Center).
Sec. 2. Purpose of Executive Branch Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. The purpose of the agency Centers will be to coordinate agency efforts to eliminate regulatory, contracting, and other programmatic obstacles to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the provision of social services.
Sec. 3. Responsibilities of the Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. Each Center shall, to the extent permitted by law:
(a) conduct, in coordination with the White House OFBCI, an agency-wide audit to identify all existing barriers to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the delivery of social services by the agency, including but not limited to regulations, rules, orders, procurement, and other internal policies and practices, and outreach activities that either facially discriminate against or otherwise discourage or disadvantage the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in Federal programs;
Sec. 4. Reporting Requirements.
the program activities of the agency and the preparation of applications or proposals for grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, and procurement.
(c) Performance Indicators. The first report, filed 180 days after the date of this order, shall include annual performance indicators and measurable objectives for agency action. Each report filed thereafter shall measure the agency's performance against the objectives set forth in the initial report.
Sec. 5. Responsibilities of the Secretary of Agriculture and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development. The Secretary and the Administrator shall:
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

December 12, 2002.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 12:09 p.m., December 13, 2002]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on December 16.