George W. Bush
December 11, 2002

Executive Order 13278—Presidents Commission on the United States Postal Service
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to ensure the efficient operation of the United States Postal Service while minimizing the financial exposure of the American taxpayers, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment. There is established the President's Commission on the United States Postal Service (Commission).
Sec. 2. Membership. Commission shall be composed of nine members appointed by the President. The President shall designate two members of the Commission to serve as Co-Chairs.
Sec. 3. Mission. (a) The mission of the Commission shall be to examine the state of the United States Postal Service, and to prepare and submit to the President a report articulating a proposed vision for the future of the United States Postal Service and recommending the legislative and administrative reforms needed to ensure the viability of postal services.
(iii) the rigidities in cost or service that limit the efficiency of the postal system;
Commission, any functions of the President under that Act, except for those in section 6 of that Act, shall be performed by the Secretary of the Treasury, in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator of General Services.
(g) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
Sec. 5. Report. The Commission shall submit its report, consistent with its mission set forth in section 3 of this order, to the President, through the Secretary of the Treasury, not later than July 31, 2003.
Sec. 6. General Provisions. (a) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and it is not intended to, and does not create, any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its report and in no event later than August 30, 2003.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

December 11, 2002.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., December 12, 2002]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on December 13.