George W. Bush
December 30, 2008

Letter to Congressional Leaders Certifying Actions Related to the Protocol Additional to the Agreement Between the United States of America and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in the United States of America
Dear__________:
I have considered the Protocol Additional to the Agreement between the United States of America and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in the United States of America, with Annexes, signed at Vienna on June 12, 1998 (the "U.S.-IAEA Additional Protocol") (T. Doc. 107-7), along with the views, recommendations, and statements of all interested executive branch agencies. In accordance with the first condition of the March 31, 2004, Senate resolution of advice and consent to ratification of the U.S.IAEA Additional Protocol, I hereby certify that not later than 180 days after the deposit of the United States instrument of ratification:
1. all necessary regulations will be promulgated and will be in force regarding the use of the National Security Exclusion under Article 1.b of the U.S.-IAEA Additional Protocol, and such regulations shall be made in accordance with the principles developed for the application of the National Security Exclusion;
2. the managed access provisions of Articles 7 and 1.c of the U.S.-IAEA Additional Protocol shall be implemented in accordance with the appropriate and necessary interagency guidance and regulation regarding such access; and
3. the necessary security and counterintelligence training and preparation will have been completed for any declared locations of direct national security significance.
In accordance with the second condition of the March 31, 2004, Senate resolution of advice and consent to ratification of the U.S.-IAEA Additional Protocol, I hereby certify that the necessary site vulnerability assessments regarding activities, locations, and information of direct national security significance to the United States will be completed not later than 180 days after the deposit of the United States instrument of ratification for the initial United States declaration to the International Atomic Energy Agency under the U.S.-IAEA Additional Protocol.
Sincerely,
GEORGE W. BUSH
NOTE: Identical letters were sent to Ike Skelton, chairman, and Duncan Hunter, ranking member, House Committee on Armed Services; Howard L. Berman, chairman, and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, ranking member, House Committee on Foreign Affairs; Carl Levin, chairman, and John McCain, ranking member, Senate Committee on Armed Services; and Joseph R. Biden, Jr., chairman, and Richard G. Lugar, ranking member, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.