George W. Bush
February 27, 2004

Executive Order 13331—National and Community Service Programs
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to strengthen the ability of programs authorized under the national service laws to build and reinforce a culture of service, citizenship, and responsibility throughout our Nation, and to institute reforms to improve accountability and efficiency in the administration of those programs, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Definitions. For purposes of this order:
(iii) National and community service programs should increase efforts to expand opportunities for, and strengthen the capacity of, faith-based and other community organizations in building and strengthening an infrastructure to support volunteers that meet community needs;
(vii) National and community service programs should foster a lifetime of citizenship and civic engagement among those who serve;
(viii) National and community service programs should avoid or eliminate practices that displace volunteers who are not supported under the national service laws; and
(ix) Guidelines for the selection of national and community service programs should recognize the importance of professional corps programs in light of the fundamental principles and policymaking criteria set forth in this order.
Sec. 4. Management Reforms. (a) The Corporation should implement internal management reforms to strengthen its oversight of national and community service programs through enforcement of performance and compliance standards and other management tools.
(b) Management reforms should include, but should not be limited to, the following:
(iii) Assurance by the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer in the Corporation's Management Representation Letter that its financial statements, including the Statement of Budgetary Resources, are accurate and reliable; and
(iv) Management reforms that tie employee performance to fiscal responsibility, attainment of management goals, and professional conduct.
Sec. 5. Report. Within 180 days after the date of this order, the Chief Executive Officer shall report to the President, through the Assistant to the President and Director of the USA Freedom Corps Office, the actions the Corporation proposes to undertake to accomplish the objectives set forth in this order.
Sec. 6. Judicial Review. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or other entities, its officers or employees, or any other person. GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

February 27, 2004.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., March 2, 2004]
Note: This Executive order will be published in the Federal Register on March 3.