George W. Bush
February 24, 2004

Executive Order 13330—Human Service Transportation Coordination
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to enhance access to transportation to improve mobility, employment opportunities, and access to community services for persons who are transportation-disadvantaged, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. This order is issued consistent with the following findings and principles:
tems is essential for persons with disabilities, persons with low incomes, and older adults who rely on such transportation to fully participate in their communities.
Sec. 2. Definitions. (a) As used in this order, the term "agency" means an executive department or agency of the Federal Government.
(b) For the purposes of this order, persons who are transportation-disadvantaged are persons who qualify for Federally conducted or Federally assisted transportation-related programs or services due to disability, income, or advanced age.
Sec. 3. Establishment of the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council on Access and Mobility. (a) There is hereby established, within the Department of Transportation for administrative purposes, the "Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council on Access and Mobility" ("Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council" or "Council"). The membership of the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council shall consist of:
Sec 4. Functions of the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council. The Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council shall:
advance the principles set forth in section 1 of this order.
Sec. 6. General. (a) Agencies shall assist the Interagency Transportation Coordinating Council and provide information to the Council consistent with applicable law as may be necessary to carry out its functions. To the extent permitted by law, and as permitted by available agency resources, the Department of Transportation shall provide funding and administrative support for the Council.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

February 24, 2004.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 11:57 a.m., February 25, 2004]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on February 26.