George W. Bush
July 22, 2004

Executive Order 13347—Individuals With Disabilities in Emergency Preparedness
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to strengthen emergency preparedness with respect to individuals with disabilities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. To ensure that the Federal Government appropriately supports safety and security for individuals with disabilities in situations involving disasters, including earthquakes, tornadoes, fires, floods, hurricanes, and acts of terrorism, it shall be the policy of the United States that executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government (agencies):
Sec. 2. Establishment of Council. (a) There is hereby established, within the Department of Homeland Security for administrative purposes, the Interagency Coordinating Council on Emergency Preparedness and Individuals with Disabilities (the "Council"). The Council shall consist exclusively of the following members or their designees:
(i) the heads of executive departments, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Administrator of General Services, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management, and the Commissioner of Social Security; and
(ii) any other agency head as the Secretary of Homeland Security may, with the concurrence of the agency head, designate.
Sec. 3. Functions of Council. (a) The Council shall:
(iii) at the request of any agency head (or the agency head's designee under section 2(c) of this order) who is a member of the Council, unless the Secretary of Homeland Security declines the request, promptly review and provide advice, for the purpose of furthering the policy set forth in section 1, on a proposed action by that agency.
(b) The Council shall submit to the President each year beginning 1 year after the date of this order, through the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security, a report that describes:
private organizations and individuals for emergency preparedness planning with respect to individuals with disabilities; and
(iii) recommendations of the Council for advancing the policy set forth in section
1.
Sec. 4. General. (a) To the extent permitted by law:
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

July 22, 2004.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 11:37 a.m., July 23, 2004]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on July 26.