George W. Bush
June 27, 2005

Executive Order 13381—Strengthening Processes Relating to Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified National Security Information
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to assist in determining eligibility for access to classified national security information, while taking appropriate account of title III of Public Law 108–458, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. To the extent consistent with safeguarding the security of the United States and protecting classified national security information from unauthorized disclosure, agency functions relating to determining eligibility for access to classified national security information shall be appropriately uniform, centralized, efficient, effective, timely, and reciprocal.
Sec. 2. Functions of the Office of Management and Budget. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Director):
Sec. 3. Functions of the Heads of Agencies.
(iii) to the extent permitted by law, make available to the Director such information as the Director may request to implement this order;
Sec. 4. Definitions. As used in this order:
U.S.C. 401a); and
lection of information through investigation and other means upon which such determinations are made.
Sec. 5. General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to supersede, impede, or otherwise affect:
U.S.C. 2161 through 2166).
Sec. 6. Submission of Report and Expiration of Order.
(a) The Director shall submit a report to the President, on or before April 1, 2006, on the implementation of this order and the policy set forth in section 1 of this order.
(b) Unless extended by the President, this order shall expire on July 1, 2006.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

June 27, 2005.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., June 29, 2005]
Note: This Executive order was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on June 28, and it was published in the Federal Register on June 30.