George W. Bush
June 18, 2001

Executive Order 13217—Community-Based Alternatives for Individuals With Disabilities
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to place qualified individuals with disabilities in community settings whenever appropriate, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. This order is issued consistent with the following findings and principles:
(a) The United States is committed to community-based alternatives for individuals with disabilities and recognizes that such
services advance the best interests of Americans.
Sec. 2. Swift Implementation of the Olmstead Decision: Agency Responsibilities.
(a) The Attorney General, the Secretaries of Health and Human Services, Education, Labor, and Housing and Urban Development, and the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration shall work cooperatively to ensure that the Olmstead decision is implemented in a timely manner. Specifically, the designated agencies should work with States to help them assess their compliance with the Olmstead decision and the ADA in providing services to qualified individuals with disabilities in community-based settings, as long as such services are appropriate to the needs of those individuals. These agencies should provide technical guidance and work cooperatively with States to achieve the goals of Title II of the ADA, particularly where States have chosen to develop comprehensive, effectively working plans to provide services to qualified individuals with disabilities in the most integrated settings. These agencies should also ensure that existing Federal resources are used in the most effective manner to support the goals of the ADA. The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall take the lead in coordinating these efforts.
Sec. 3. Judicial Review. Nothing in this order shall affect any otherwise available judicial review of agency action. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

June 18, 2001.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., June 20, 2001]
Note: This Executive order was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on June 19, and it was published in the Federal Register on June 21.