George W. Bush
June 01, 2004

Executive Order 13342—Responsibilities of the Departments of Commerce and Veterans Affairs and the Small Business Administration With Respect to Faith-Based and Community Initiatives
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to help the Federal Government coordinate a national effort to expand opportunities for faith-based and other community organizations and to strengthen their capacity to better meet America's social and community needs, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment of Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives at the Departments of Commerce and Veterans Affairs and the Small Business Administration.
Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives (White House OFBCI).
Sec. 2. Purpose of Executive Branch Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. The purpose of the agency Centers will be to coordinate agency efforts to eliminate regulatory, contracting, and other programmatic obstacles to the participation of faith-based and other community organizations in the provision of social and community services.
Sec. 3. Responsibilities of the Centers for Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. Each Center shall, to the extent permitted by law:
gramming changes, contracting opportunities, and other agency initiatives, including but not limited to Web and Internet resources.
Sec. 4. Reporting Requirements. (a) Report. Not later than 180 days from the date of this order and annually thereafter, each of the three Centers described in section 1 of this order shall prepare and submit a report to the President through the White House OFBCI.
Sec. 5. Responsibilities of the Secretaries of Commerce and Veterans Affairs and the Administrator of the Small Business Administration. The Secretaries and the Administrator shall:
Sec. 6. Administration and Judicial Review. (a) The agency actions directed by this executive order shall be carried out subject
to the availability of appropriations and to the extent permitted by law.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

June 1, 2004.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 9:10 a.m., June 2, 2004]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on June 3.