George W. Bush
June 20, 2001

Executive Order 13218—21st Century Workforce Initiative
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), and in order to promote the study and the development of strategies to address the needs of the 21st century workforce, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment of the Office of the 21st Century Workforce. (a) The Secretary of Labor is hereby directed to establish within the Department of Labor the Office of the 21st Century Workforce. The Office shall provide a focal point for the identification and study of issues relating to the workforce of the United States and the development of strategies for effectively addressing such issues.
Sec. 2. Establishment of the Council on the 21st Century Workforce.
(a) Establishment and Composition of the Council.
be appointed by the President. The membership shall include individuals who represent the views of business and labor organizations, Federal, State, and local governments, academicians and educators, and such other associations and entities as the President determines are appropriate. In addition, the Secretary of Labor and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall serve as ex officio members representing the views of the Federal Government. The Secretary of Labor shall be the Chairperson of the Council.
(b) Functions of the Council. The Council shall provide information and advice to the President through the Secretary of Labor, the Office of the 21st Century Workforce within the Department of Labor, and other appropriate Federal officials relating to issues affecting the 21st century workforce. These activities shall include:
(iii) identifying impediments to the adjustment to such changes by workers and employers and recommending approaches and policies that could remove those impediments;
(c) Administration of the Council.
(iii) Each member of the Council who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation but shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in Federal service (5 U.S.C. 5701–5707).
(d) Termination of the Council. The Council shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order unless extended by the President prior to such date.
Sec. 3. Effect on Prior Orders.
(a) Amendments to Executive Order 13111 of January 12, 1999. In order to ensure the coordination and nonduplication of advice and information regarding 21st century workforce issues, section 6 of Executive Order 13111, relating to the functions of the Advisory Committee on Expanding Training Opportunities, is amended to read as follows:
"Sec. 6. Functions of the Advisory Committee. The Committee shall provide the President, through the Secretary of Labor (who shall ensure the coordination of the activities of the Committee with the activities undertaken pursuant to sections 1 and 2 of the Executive Order on the 21st Century Workforce Initiative), an independent assessment of:
(b) Revocation of Executive Order 13174. Executive Order 13174 of October 27, 2000, relating to the establishment of the Commission on Workers, Communities, and Economic Change in the New Economy, is revoked. GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

June 20, 2001.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., June 21, 2001]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on June 22.