George W. Bush
March 19, 2002

Executive Order 13260—Establishing the Presidents Homeland Security Advisory Council and Senior Advisory Committees for Homeland Security
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. President's Homeland Security Advisory Council.
(a) Establishment and Membership. I hereby establish the President's Homeland Security Advisory Council (PHSAC). The PHSAC shall be composed of not more than 21 members appointed by the President. In addition, the Chair and the Vice Chair of the National Infrastructure Advisory Council; the Chairman of the President's National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee; and the Chair of the Panel on the Science and Technology of Combating Terrorism, President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, shall serve as ex officio members of the PHSAC. The appointed members of the PHSAC shall be selected from the private sector, academia, professional service associations, federally funded research and development centers, nongovernmental organizations, State and local governments, and other appropriate professions and communities.
(iii) Subcommittees. The Chair of each SAC, in consultation with the PHSAC, may as appropriate establish subcommittees to advise the SAC.
Sec. 2. Functions. The PHSAC shall meet periodically at the Assistant's request to:
(a) provide advice to the President through the Assistant on developing and coordinating the implementation of a comprehensive national strategy to secure the United States from terrorist threats or attacks;
Sec. 4. General Provisions. (a) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (Act), may apply to the administration of any portion of this order, any functions of the President under that Act, except that of reporting to the Congress, shall be performed by the Administrator of General Services in accordance with the guidelines that have been issued by the Administrator.
(b) The PHSAC, any SACs, and any SAC subcommittees shall terminate 2 years from the date of this order unless extended by the President.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

March 19, 2002.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 12:11 p.m., March 20, 2002]
Note: This Executive order was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on March 21 and published in the Federal Register on March 21.