George W. Bush
November 15, 2002

Executive Order 13276—Delegation of Responsibilities Concerning Undocumented Aliens Interdicted or Intercepted in the Caribbean Region
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 212(f) and 215(a)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended (8 U.S.C. 1182(f) and 1185(a)(1)), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to delegate appropriate responsibilities to Federal agencies for responding to migration of undocumented aliens in the Caribbean region, it is hereby ordered:
Section 1. Duties and Authorities of Agency Heads. Consistent with applicable law,
(a)(i) The Attorney General may maintain custody, at any location he deems appropriate, of any undocumented aliens he has reason to believe are seeking to enter the United States and who are interdicted or intercepted in the Caribbean region. In this regard, the Attorney General shall provide and operate a facility, or facilities, to house and provide for the needs of any such aliens. Such a facility may be located at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base or any other appropriate location.
(ii) The Attorney General may conduct any screening of such aliens that he deems appropriate, including screening to determine whether such aliens should be returned to their country of origin or transit, or whether they are persons in need of protection who should not be returned without their consent. If the Attorney General institutes such screening, then until a determination is made, the Attorney General shall provide for the custody, care, safety, transportation, and other needs of the aliens. The Attorney General shall continue to provide for the custody, care, safety, transportation, and other needs of aliens who are determined not to be persons in need of protection until such time as they are returned to their country of origin or transit.
migration. The Secretary of Defense shall also provide support to the Coast Guard in carrying out the duties described in Executive Order 12807 of May 24, 1992, regarding interdiction of migrants.
Sec. 2. Definitions. For purposes of this order, the term "mass migration" means a migration of undocumented aliens that is of such magnitude and duration that it poses a threat to the national security of the United States, as determined by the President.
Sec. 3. Scope.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

November 15, 2002.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 11:24 a.m., November 18, 2002]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on November 19. This item was not received in time for publication in the appropriate issue.