George W. Bush
October 09, 2007

Remarks Following a Meeting on the No Child Left Behind Act Reauthorization
Secretary Spellings and I are so pleased to welcome you all to the Roosevelt Room. With us today are a group of concerned citizens from a variety of groups, here to discuss the No Child Left Behind Act. People around this table care deeply about making sure every child gets a good education. We're deeply concerned about school systems that don't focus on each individual. Some school systems are just moving kids through, and as a result, our education system is letting too many children down, too many families without hope. So we're going to strategize and work together to make sure the No Child Left Behind Act is reauthorized and made stronger.
And so I want to thank you all for coming. I love your passion. I appreciate the fact that you care deeply about the future of this country and that you believe, like I believe, every child can learn, and we have an obligation to teach every child how to read and write and add and subtract.
So thank you for joining us. We'll see you all in the Rose Garden here in a minute.
NOTE: The President spoke at 1:06 p.m. in the Roosevelt Room at the White House. In his remarks, he referred to Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings. Also participating in the meeting were the First Lady; John C. Brittain, chief counsel and senior deputy director, Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law; Roslyn McCallister Brock, vice chairman, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People National Board of Directors; Michael Casserly, executive director, Council of the Great City Schools; Wade Henderson, president and chief executive officer, Leadership Conference on Civil Rights; Lawrence Hernandez, founder, chief executive officer, and principal, Cesar Chavez Academy, Pueblo, CO; Marc H. Morial, president and chief executive officer, National Urban League; Janet Murguia, president and chief executive officer, National Council of La Raza; Dianne Pich, executive director, Citizens' Commission on Civil Rights; Sonia Rodriguez, chairperson, Coalition for Access to Educational Resources; Ricki Sabia, associate director, National Down Syndrome Society Policy Center; Amy Wilkins, vice president for government affairs and communications, The Education Trust; and Peter Zamora, cochair, Hispanic Education Coalition.