George W. Bush
October 02, 2001

Letter to Congressional Leaders on the Bipartisan Agreement on Fiscal Year 2002 Discretionary Appropriations Levels
Dear__________:
I support the bipartisan agreement to set FY 2002 discretionary appropriations levels at a total of $686 billion. If the Congress presents appropriations bills to me that comply with this aggregate spending level, and are otherwise acceptable, I will sign them.
Within this total, I understand that defense activities will be funded at the amended budget level. In addition, I understand that an appropriations bill for education will include $4 billion above my budget request and will be accommodated within the total discretionary level. I also understand that the agreement includes $2.2 billion in contingent emergency appropriations, within the $686 billion agreement. These emergency funds would be available only to the extent that they are necessary to fund unexpected costs that may arise as a consequence of urgent requirements beyond the program funding levels provided in the regular appropriations bills.
This agreement does not compromise my discretion to consider the policy and program content of legislation before agreeing to sign it. However, passage of appropriations measures within the agreed total will mean that there will be no disagreement between the Congress and my Administration over aggregate funding levels.
This agreement is the result of extensive discussions to produce an acceptable bipartisan solution to facilitate the orderly enactment of appropriations measures. This agreement and the aggregate spending level are the result of a strong bipartisan effort at this critical time for our Nation, and I expect that all parties will now proceed expeditiously and in full compliance with the agreement.
Sincerely,
GEORGE W. BUSH
NOTE: Identical letters were sent to J. Dennis Hastert, Speaker of the House of Representatives; Richard A. Gephardt, House minority leader; C.W. Bill Young, chairman, and David R. Obey, ranking member, House Committee on Appropriations; Thomas A. Daschle, Senate majority leader; Trent Lott, Senate minority leader; and Robert C. Byrd, chairman, and Ted Stevens, ranking member, Senate Committee on Appropriations. An original was not available for verification of the content of this letter.