George W. Bush
October 14, 2005

Executive Order 13387—2005 Amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including chapter 47 of title 10, United States Code (Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 801–946), and in order to prescribe amendments to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, prescribed by Executive Order 12473, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Part II of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
"What is substantially one transaction should not be made the basis for an unreasonable multiplication of charges against one person."
(h) R.C.M. 501(a)(1) is amended to read
as follows: "(1) General courts-martial.
(A) Except in capital cases, general courts-martial shall consist of a military judge and not less than five members, or of the military judge alone if requested and approved under
R.C.M. 903.
"No general court-martial proceeding requiring the presence of members may be conducted unless at least five members are present, or in capital cases, at least 12 members are present except as provided in
R.C.M. 501(a)(1)(B), where 12 members are not reasonably available because of physical conditions or military exigencies. No special court-martial proceeding requiring the presence of members may be conducted unless at least three members are present except as provided in R.C.M. 912(h)."
of trial. Copies of the record shall contain appropriate annotations that matters were sealed by order of the military judge and have been inserted in the original record of trial. This Rule shall be implemented in a manner consistent with Executive Order 12958, as amended, concerning classified national security information.
Supreme Court, authorization to disclose sealed materials or information shall be obtained under that Court's rules of practice and procedure.
(vii) The Justices of the United States Supreme Court and their professional staffs; and
(viii) Any other court of competent jurisdiction."
(s) R.C.M. 1301(a) is amended by inserting the following after the second sentence:
"Summary courts-martial shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations of the military service to which the accused belongs."
Sec. 2. Part III of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
Mil. R. Evid. 317(b) is amended by replacing the word "Transportation" with the words "Homeland Security."
Sec. 3. Part IV of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
(c) Paragraph 35a is amended to read as
follows: "a. Text.
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa, and the term "State" includes each of those jurisdictions."
(d) Paragraph 35b(2)(c) is amended to read as follows:
"(c) the alcohol concentration level in the accused's blood or breath, as shown by chemical analysis, was equal to or exceeded the applicable level provided in paragraph 35a above."
(e) Paragraph 35f is amended as follows:
"In that llllllllll(personal jurisdiction data), did (at/on board - required), on or about lllll20ll, (in the motor pool area) (near the Officer's Club) (at the intersection of llllland lllll) (while in the Gulf of Mexico) (while in flight over North America) physically control [a vehicle, to wit: (a truck) (a passenger car) (lllll)] [an aircraft, to wit: (an AH–64 helicopter)(an F–14A fighter)(a KC–135 tanker) (lllll)] [a vessel, to wit: (the aircraft carrier USS lllll) (the Coast Guard Cutter) (lllll)], [while drunk] [while impaired by lllll] [while the alcohol concentration in his (blood)(breath) was, as shown by chemical analysis, equal to or exceeded (.10) (lllll) grams of alcohol per (100 milliliters of blood) (210 liters of breath), which is the limit under (cite applicable State law) (cite applicable statute or regulation)] [in a (reckless) (wanton) manner by (attempting to pass another vehicle on a sharp curve) (by ordering that the aircraft be flown below the authorized altitude)] [and did thereby cause said (vehicle) (aircraft) (vessel) to (strike and) (injure lllll )]."
(f) Paragraph 97 is amended by (1) inserting the following new subparagraph (b)(2) and renumbering the existing subparagraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) as (b)(3) and (b)(4); (2) adding the words "and patronizing a prostitute" after the word "Prostitution" in subparagraph (e)(1); and (3) inserting the following new subparagraph (f)(2) and renumbering the existing subparagraphs (f)(2) and (f)(3) as (f)(3) and (f)(4):
"(b)(2) Patronizing a prostitute.
"(f)(2) Patronizing a prostitute.
In that llllllllll (personal jurisdiction data), did, (at/on board - location) (subject-matter jurisdiction data, if required), on or about lllll20lll, wrongfully (compel) (induce) (entice) (procure) lllll , a person not his/her spouse, to engage in (an act) (acts) of sexual intercourse with the accused in exchange for (money) (llllllllll)."
(g) Paragraph 109 is amended to read as follows:
"109. ARTICLE 134 - (Threat or hoax designed or intended to cause panic or public fear)
(1) Threat.
weapon of mass destruction; biological or chemical agent, substance, or weapon; or hazardous material, to unlawfully kill, injure, or intimidate a person or to unlawfully damage or destroy certain property;
f. Sample specifications.
(1) Threat.
In that llllllllll (personal jurisdiction data) did, (at/on board - location) on or about lllll 20lll, wrongfully communicate certain information, to wit: lllll, which language constituted a threat to harm a person or property by means of a(n) [explosive; weapon of mass destruction; biological agent, substance, or weapon; chemical agent, substance, or weapon; and/or (a) hazardous material(s)].
(2) Hoax.
In that llllllllll (personal jurisdiction data) did, (at/on board - location), on or about lllll20lll, maliciously (communicate) (convey) certain information concerning an attempt being made or to be made to unlawfully [(kill) (injure) (intimidate) lllll] [(damage) (destroy) lllll] by means of a(n) [explosive; weapon of mass destruction; biological agent, substance, or weapon; chemical agent, substance, or weapon; and/or (a) hazardous material(s)], to wit: lllll, which information was false and which the accused then knew to be false."
Sec. 4. Part V of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States, is amended as follows:
straint, investigation, referral of charges, trial, or other action may proceed in the same manner and with the same effect as if these amendments had not been prescribed.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

October 14, 2005.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., October 17, 2005]
Note: This Executive order will be published in the Federal Register on October 18.