Donald J. Trump
May 13, 2020

Letter to Congressional Leaders on Continuation of the National Emergency With Respect to Securing the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain
Dear Madam Speaker: (Dear Mr. President:)
Section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)) provides for the automatic termination of a national emergency unless, within 90 days before the anniversary date of its declaration, the President publishes in theFederal Registerand transmits to the Congress a notice stating that the emergency is to continue in effect beyond the anniversary date. In accordance with this provision, I have sent to theFederal Registerfor publication the enclosed notice stating that the national emergency with respect to securing the information and communications technology and services supply chain declared in Executive Order 13873 of May 15, 2019, is to continue in effect beyond May 15, 2020.
The unrestricted acquisition or use in the United States of information and communications technology or services designed, developed, manufactured, or supplied by persons owned by, controlled by, or subject to the jurisdiction or direction of foreign adversaries augments the ability of these foreign adversaries to create and exploit vulnerabilities in information and communications technology or services, with potentially catastrophic effects. This threat continues to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States. For this reason, I have determined that it is necessary to continue the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13873 with respect to securing the information and communications technology and services supply chain.
Sincerely,
DONALD J. TRUMP
NOTE: Identical letters were sent to Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the House of Representatives, and Michael R. Pence, President of the Senate. An original was not available for verification of the content of this letter.