Donald J. Trump
October 04, 2017

Memorandum on Integration, Sharing, and Use of National Security Threat Actor Information To Protect Americans
National Security Presidential Memorandum-7
Memorandum for the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Assistant to the President and Senior Adviser, the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, the Counsel to the President, the Director of National Intelligence, the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, the Director of National Drug Control Policy, the Director of the National Counterterrorism Center, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Director of the National Security Agency, the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Co-Chairs of the President's Intelligence Advisory Board, the Administrator of Drug Enforcement, the Director of the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency, and the Archivist of the United States.
Subject:Integration, Sharing, and Use of National Security Threat Actor Information to Protect Americans
Section 1. Policy.
The United States Government's ability to effectively analyze, evaluate, integrate, correlate, and share classified national security information and other information concerning threat actors and their networks, and then use that information to support a broad array of national security missions and activities, is an essential component of our national security strategy. Equally important is the United States Government's ability to conduct these activities in a manner that: (a) appropriately protects the security and integrity of that information and its origins; (b) properly considers, approves, and monitors the information's application and use, consistent with applicable law and Presidential guidance; (c) ensures relevant operational deconfliction and security; and (d) maintains and uses the information in a manner that appropriately protects individuals' privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties, including by providing appropriate redress. Our continuing efforts to achieve these goals requires both systematic collaboration across national security components and integrated practices that fully utilize our collective data holdings to support vital national security missions.
Therefore, to protect against actors who threaten our Nation, it is the policy of the United States to: (a) lawfully identify, integrate, and make available thorough, accurate, and timely national security threat actor information; (b) effectively manage that information within appropriate policy frameworks and technical architectures, including data repositories, integrated systems, and cloud architectures; (c) where appropriate and consistent with applicable law, deliberately use that information to support national security activities; and (d) where appropriate and consistent with applicable law, share relevant and releasable information, products, and outputs with foreign governments, international organizations, and State, local, territorial, tribal, and private-sector partners where required to support activities that benefit national security. National security threat actor information comprises identity attributes and associated information about individuals, organizations, groups, or networks assessed to be a threat to the safety, security, or national interests of the United States that fall into one or more of the categories listed in the annex to this memorandum.
This memorandum shall be implemented in a manner that is consistent with applicable law and Presidential guidance; safeguards intelligence sources, methods, and activities; protects otherwise sensitive information and preserves the integrity of sensitive operations and investigations; and appropriately protects privacy, civil rights, civil liberties, and other constitutional and statutory rights, including through compliance with applicable guidelines governing the collection, retention, and dissemination of personally identifiable information.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply throughout this memorandum:
Associated information:Information that demonstrates the meaningful (i.e., non-incidental) associations, capabilities, intentions, and activities of an individual, organization, group, or network.
Identity attributes:Information (including biometric and biographic data) that can be used independently or in combination with other data to identify a specific individual.
Sec. 3. Implementation.
To strengthen the ability of the United States Government to protect against individuals who threaten our national security interests or the safety of United States citizens, and consistent with applicable law and the policy set forth in section 1 of this memorandum:

Sec. 4. General Provisions.
This memorandum does not alter existing statutory and regulatory authorities or responsibilities of agency heads to carry out operational activities or provide and receive information.
This memorandum is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
DONALD J. TRUMP
NOTE: The memorandum was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on October 5.