Richard Nixon
April 07, 1971

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report on Marine Resources and Engineering Development.
To the Congress of the United States:
Creation last year of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has given us the capacity to manage our Federal oceanic, atmospheric and environmental responsibilities with substantially greater effectiveness and efficiency.
The United States' marine science program was marked in 1970 by a number of sound accomplishments and new departures.
Internationally, we worked successfully with other nations to produce a seabed arms control treaty. We proposed development of a treaty governing the exploration and exploitation of seabed resources and submitted a working draft of such a treaty to the United Nations. And we are also joining forces with others in earnest efforts to preserve the quality of the marine environment.
A major step toward more rational use of the oceans was taken in December, 1970, when the nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization resolved to achieve by 1975, if possible, and by the end of the decade at the latest the elimination of intentional discharges of oil and oily wastes into the oceans. We are earnestly pursuing this worthy objective. It is my hope that the Senate, as part of this effort, will soon give its advice and consent to the international oil spills conventions and amendments which were transmitted last May.
I have also asked the Congress to enact the Ports and Waterways Safety Act, which would increase the Coast Guard's authority to protect against oil spills, and the Wholesome Fish and Fishery Products Act, which would provide for the inspection of fish and fishery products during their harvesting, processing and transport.
These accomplishments are reported in detail in the annual report of the National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, "Marine Science Affairs," which I am today transmitting to the Congress. During 1970, the Council, which is chaired by the Vice President, has continued to assist me in the development of marine science policy, the coordination of Federal programs, and the effecting of an orderly transition during the reorganization of Federal agencies in the marine sciences. As the Council now completes its work, we can take pride in the new policies and programs that fulfill the objectives of the Marine Resources and Engineering Development Act. The Council deserves our gratitude for a job well done.
My budget request for fiscal year 1972 provides $609.1 million for marine science, technology and services--an increase of more than $70 million over my request of a year ago. These funds would permit NOAA to undertake priority programs of fundamental importance to the Nation's marine science interests; they will permit us to continue the accomplishments of the Sea Grant program; to further our participation in the International Decade of Ocean Exploration; to insure that necessary marine research and development is conducted for national security purposes; and to make certain that marine research and development, generally, continue to make productive contributions to our growing use of the sea.
We have embarked on a strong marine science program for the 1970s. In the year ahead the Federal Government will build on these accomplishments. And we will look to all sectors of the Nation's marine science community--State and local governments, industry and the universities-to contribute to the fullest to the United States' efforts to make better use of the oceans and to provide world leadership on the major ocean issues before the community of nations.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

April 7, 1971
Note: The report is entitled "Marine Science Affairs: Annual Report of the President to the Congress on Marine Resources and Engineering Development" (Government Printing Office, 114 pp.).