Richard Nixon
April 02, 1973

Remarks of Welcome to President Nguyen Van Thieu of the Republic of Vietnam at San Clemente, California.
Mr. President, all of our distinguished guests, and ladies and gentlemen:
Mr. President, this is the fifth time that I have had the honor and pleasure of meeting with you, but for the first time I am honored to welcome you in my native land, in my native State, and here at my home.
As we welcome you today, we think back to the times we have met before. Particularly I think of the time that we first met as heads of state at Midway, 4 years ago. On that occasion, you said after our meeting that you looked forward to the time when we could meet not for the purpose of discussing the conduct of war, but for the purpose of discussing the building of peace, and now, today, that day has come.
There are, of course, difficulties in building a peace after 25 years of war have torn your country apart. But on the other hand, when we compare the situation today to what it was 4 years ago at Midway when we met, we see the progress that has been made toward that goal. On that day, when there were over half a million Americans fighting side by side with your people, we now find that all the American forces have returned, and the people of Vietnam have the strength to defend their own independence and their right to choose their government in the years ahead.
We know that this would not have been possible without the courage and also the leadership that you have displayed in providing an example for the people of your country, and the courage that they have exemplified, and the sacrifices they have

made.
Now, as we meet today for e days of meetings, we meet to work toward the building of peace, a peace for your land which has suffered so much and your people who have suffered so much, and a peace, as it is built there, which can contribute to lasting peace in the world.
I would say simply, as we conclude, that the name of our house here is Casa Pacifica, which means House of the Pacific, and also House of Peace, and we hope from this day, as a result of our talks, will come great steps forward in building the lasting peace, the real peace that we have fought together for and that now we want all of our people to live for.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 10:20 a.m. at his home in San Clemente, Calif., where President Thieu was given a formal welcome with full military honors.
See also Items 105 and 106.
President Thieu responded as follows:
Mr. President, Mrs. Nixon, ladies and gentlemen:
Thank you very much, Mr. President, for this warm welcome and for your very kind words. Mrs. Thieu and I are very happy to come here today to this beautiful land of freedom and prosperity. We appreciate most especially your hospitality.
I find it very significant that the discussions which I will soon hold with you on this visit, which will establish the new basis for the cooperation between the United States and Vietnam, following the Vietnam peace agreement, are to be held in the Western White House on the Pacific Coast, because both the United States and Vietnam belong to the same community of nations bordering on the Pacific Ocean.
History has proved that there can be no solid peace in the world unless there is peace and stability in the Pacific area. History has also shown that for the Pacific Ocean to deserve its peaceful name, courage and tenacity are as important today as they were to the navigators who first sailed across this vast ocean centuries ago.
Mr. President, over 3 years ago, when we met at Midway, at a time when the Vietnam war was raging we laid down together the foundations for a promising solution to the Vietnam conflict that came to be known as the Vietnamization. Today, while over 300,000 American troops still stay in Europe to bolster the defense of Western Europe, more than a quarter century after World War II was over, we in Vietnam are proud that, thanks to your help, the Vietnamese defense force was able to repel an all-out Communist invasion last year, at a time when American ground troops had been withdrawn.
This made possible a peace with honor whereby the Communist aggressors, in the Paris agreement last January, had to recognize formally the right of self-determination of the people of South Vietnam and the principle that the problems we will solve in North Vietnam are to be solved by peaceful means, without coercion and annexation.
While the road to lasting peace is still an arduous one, a new page has been turned with the conclusion of the Paris agreement, and I look forward to having fruitful conversation with you, Mr. President, on the various aspects of the relation between our two countries in this new context.
I earnestly hope that the joint efforts of our two governments would lead to a consolidation of peace in Indochina and a new era of constructive cooperation in peace among all parties concerned. I avail myself on this occasion to express to you, Mr. President, and through you to the American people, the heartfelt gratitude of the Vietnamese Government and people for the generous assistance of your government and the noble contribution of the American nation to our long efforts to defend and preserve freedom for Vietnam and Southeast Asia.
Thank you very much.