Richard Nixon
April 15, 1971

Message to the Senate Transmitting Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft.
To the Senate of the United States:
With a view to receiving the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification, I transmit herewith a copy of the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed at The Hague on December 16, 1970. I transmit also for the information of the Senate the report of the Secretary of State with respect to the Convention.
The problem of aircraft hijacking has become a serious global threat to international aviation. No country or area is immune from this threat.
The Diplomatic Conference which met at The Hague December 1-16, 1970 had before it the urgent task of preparing a Convention to ensure that all hijackers, wherever found, would be subject to severe punishment for an act which endangers the safety and lives of passengers and crew aboard. I believe that the Conference achieved this objective and that it will be fully realized when States have ratified or acceded to the Convention and it has become widely accepted.
Because of the worldwide threat of hijacking, the Convention provides that all States may become parties. I hope that it will be applied universally. I made my views clear on September 11, 1970 when I stated that:
"It is imperative that all countries accept the multilateral convention providing for the extradition or punishment of hijacking [hijackers] which will be considered at the international conference which will be held under the auspices of the International Civil Aviation Organization. I affirm the support of the United States both for this convention and for the Tokyo convention, which provides for the prompt return of hijacked aircraft, passengers and crew. I call upon other governments to become parties to these conventions."
I believe that the Convention will be an important step in the development of international law and practice with respect to deterring hijacking. I urgently recommend, therefore, that the Senate give early and favorable consideration to the Convention.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

April 15, 1971
Note: The text of the convention is printed in United States Treaties and Other International Agreements (22 UST 1641 ).