Richard Nixon
April 22, 1970

Message to the Congress Transmitting Report on Federal Disaster Assistance During 1969.
To the Congress of the United States:
Natural disasters in unprecedented numbers and scope--presented a grim challenge to this nation in 1969. The exceptional response to this challenge by the United States government is something in which all Americans can take pride. The story of that response is detailed in the report which I am today transmitting to the Congress.
This report of Federal activities in 1969 under authority of the Federal Disaster Act (Public Law 875, 81st Congress, as amended) is required by Section 8 of that law and has been provided by the Director of the Office of Emergency preparedness. The report also describes activities carried out under authority of the Federal Disaster Act of 1969 (Public Law 79, 91st Congress). The funds which supported these activities are specifically appropriated to the President for the purpose of relieving suffering and repairing damage when disasters strike.
There were 29 major disasters during 1969--the largest number since the program began in 1950. Two of these-the California floods and Hurricane Camille--were exceptionally destructive. The number and extent of major disasters in 1969 required a massive Federal effort; a total of $ 148,970,000 was allocated from the President's Disaster Fund, the largest amount since the enactment of Public Law 81-875. Despite these increased demands, the Federal response was most prompt and effective and those who participated in it deserve our commendation.
Under the leadership of the Office of Emergency Preparedness, the Administration is developing a stronger and more comprehensive disaster assistance program. An important part of this strengthened program is outlined in my disaster assistance message to the Congress. That message discusses both the legislation which will be submitted--the Disaster Assistance Act of 1970--and the improvements which are being made by executive action. I am confident that our strengthened program will improve cooperation with State and local governments and with private and voluntary organizations. More important, these steps would enable the Federal government to continue to meet its responsibilities to individuals who are victimized by these unhappy events.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

April 22, 1970
Note: The 15-page report is entitled "Report on Federal Disaster Assistance in 1969."