Richard Nixon
August 19, 1970

Letter Accepting Resignation of Dr. Lee A. DuBridge as Science Adviser to the President and Director of the Office of Science and Technology
Dear Lee:
It is with deep regret that I accept your resignation effective, as you have requested, on August 31, 1970.
Your participation in my Administration during this crucially important initial period will always be a source of satisfaction to me. The skill, the wisdom and the seasoned judgment you have brought to your responsibilities here deserve a special accolade from all of us who have had the privilege of working with you, and I trust that you will take pride in the outstanding contribution you have made to the welfare of all of your fellow citizens.
While your intention to return to private life is a loss not only for me but also for all of your colleagues in Washington, I am grateful that we will continue to have your assistance as a member of the President's Science Advisory Committee. It is a pleasure to assure you of an appointment to a full four-year term on that Committee-when the vacancy occurs in December.
As you prepare to return to Southern California, I want you and Doris to know that the best wishes of the Nixons and of your many other friends here will be with you throughout the years ahead.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON
[Honorable Lee A. DuBridge, Director, Office of Science and Technology]
Note: Dr. DuBridge's letter of resignation, dated August 17, 1970, and made available with the President's letter on August 19, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
As I told you some time ago, I have been giving serious attention during recent months to the question of the appropriate length of my stay in government service--and when I should begin my planned retirement in California. I have always been convinced I should retire well in advance of my 70th birthday in 1971. Hence, I suggested to you this summer that you begin the search for my successor and allow me to retire at a date convenient both to him and yourself.
I am pleased that our search for a new Science Adviser has ended so successfully and at such an early date that my retirement can be initiated at once.
Accordingly, I tender my resignation as Science Adviser and Director of the Office of Science and Technology effective August 31, 1970. Needless to say, I shall make every effort to assist my successor to achieve a smooth transition in the work of my office.
Mr. President, my service as a member of your official White House family has been one of the great experiences of my life. It has been a privilege to have such a wonderful association with you arid so many members of your Administration. Your keen and perceptive interest in science and technology has made my work with you most stimulating and rewarding.
These past 19 months have, of course, been difficult times in many ways. One result of the fiscal problems has been the slow down (which began in 1967) of the nation's scientific and technological enterprise has not been reversed. Much of this lag in the past year has been the result of the failure of the Congress to appropriate the full amount of the funds you requested in FY 1970 for scientific research. There is evidence that in fiscal 1971 your request for increased scientific funding will be more fully met. I hope so, and I trust that our mutual desires for the continued welfare of science will be fulfilled.
Please be assured that I shall stand ready to assist you in the future in any way I can, and I trust that you and your new Science Adviser will feel free to call on me for any help I might be able to render. The welfare of science and its benefits to the nation and to the world will continue to be my prime interest.
Sincerely yours,
LEE A. DUBRIDGE
[The President, The White House]