Richard Nixon
August 13, 1970

Message to the Senate Transmitting Additional Protocol II to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
To the Senate of the United States:
I transmit herewith Additional Protocol II to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, with a view to receiving the advice and consent of the Senate to its ratification. The Additional Protocol was signed on behalf of the United States on April 1, 1968.
For the information of the Senate, I transmit also the report by the Secretary of State with respect to the Protocol and a copy of the Treaty to which it relates.
The Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, done at Mexico City February 14, 1967, is the first successful attempt to create a nuclear free zone in a populated region of the world. The Treaty is limited to states located in the Latin American region and is already in force among 16 Latin American nations.
Additional Protocol II is designed for nuclear-weapon states, which are not eligible to sign the Treaty itself. It calls upon them to respect the denuclearized status of Latin America, not to contribute to violation of the Treaty, and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against the Treaty parties.
It is in the best interests of the United States to assume these obligations toward the Latin American countries bound by the Treaty. By creating this nuclear-free zone the nations of Latin America have made an important contribution to peace and security in the Western Hemisphere. Ratification by the United States of Additional Protocol II would not only indicate our support for the Latin American nuclear-free zone but would reinforce our other arms control efforts such as the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
I recommend that the Senate give early and favorable consideration to Additional Protocol II and give its advice and consent to ratification, subject to the statement which accompanies the report of the Secretary of State. That statement, which is similar to the one made by the United States at the time of signature, expresses our understanding concerning territories and territorial claims, transit and transport privileges, non-use of nuclear weapons, and the definition of "nuclear weapon". The statement also reaffirms our willingness to make available nuclear explosion services for peaceful purposes on a nondiscriminatory basis under appropriate international arrangements.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

August 13, 1970
Note: The texts of the Protocol and report of the Secretary of State are printed in Senate Executive H (91st Gong., 2d sess.).