Richard Nixon
August 22, 1969

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Park of South Korea.
AT THE invitation of His Excellency President Richard Nixon of the United States of America, His Excellency President Park Chung Hee of the Republic of Korea and Mrs. Park visited San Francisco August 21 and 22, 1969. The meetings of the two Presidents took place in an atmosphere of warm cordiality reflecting the close and long-standing relationship between the United States and the Republic of Korea.
The two Presidents agreed that a new era is beginning in Asia marked by the increasing strength and prosperity of most Asian countries. They affirmed that these countries are increasingly contributing to the security of the East Asian and Pacific region as well as to their own security. They agreed on the desirability of strengthening existing organizations and institutions for East Asian and Pacific regional cooperation.
President Park gave an account of continuing acts of aggression committed by the North Korean communist regime against the Republic of Korea. The two Presidents agreed that Republic of Korea forces and American forces stationed in Korea must remain strong and alert and the two Presidents reaffirmed the determination of their Governments to meet armed attack against the Republic of Korea in accordance with the Mutual Defense Treaty between the Republic of Korea and the United States.
President Nixon and President Park took note of the newly formed Homeland Reserve Defense Force as a contribution to the security and stability of Korea. They agreed that support for the Homeland Reserve Defense Force should be continued.
The two Presidents recognized the necessity for long term efforts to lessen the causes of tension on the Korean peninsula.
The two Presidents agreed that allied nations should continue to work toward securing an honorable and lasting peace in Vietnam and they reaffirmed the right of the Vietnamese people to determine their own future without external interference or intimidation. President Park expressed agreement with the proposals put forth by President Nixon on May 14, 1969. President Nixon expressed appreciation to President Park for the contribution which the valiant troops of the Republic of Korea are making in Vietnam and agreed that the United States would continue to consult closely with the Republic of Korea and its other allies concerning the situation in Vietnam.
President Park expressed the gratitude of his countrymen for the consistent efforts of the United States on behalf of Korea's independence, freedom and economic reconstruction both in war and peace.
President Park conveyed to President Nixon the congratulations of the Korean people for the great achievement of Apollo 11 which marked a new chapter in the history of mankind by landing men on the moon and expressed his desire that this accomplishment would add new momentum to the common efforts of all nations in realizing a better world where all mankind would enjoy lasting peace and prosperity.
President Nixon expressed his admiration for the rapid and remarkable progress of the Republic of Korea in economic, social and other fields in recent years under President Park's leadership. President Park reaffirmed that Korea's economic goal is self-sufficiency and President Nixon expressed the intention of the United States Government to continue to cooperate with the Government of the Republic of Korea in its efforts to promote international trade and to attain an even higher level of economic development. President Nixon affirmed the readiness of the United States Government to continue to extend technical cooperation for further development of science and industry in the Republic of Korea. The two Presidents recognized that investment in Korea of United States private capital and joint ventures between United States and Korean enterprises are mutually beneficial.
The two Presidents pledged themselves to a continuation of the close cooperation which has characterized relationships between the two Governments in keeping with the mutual friendship forged on the fields of battle, first in Korea and now in Vietnam.
President Park expressed his deep appreciation to President Nixon, the Government of the United States and the Mayor and citizens of San Francisco for the warmth of their reception and for the courtesies extended to him and his party during the visit.
President Park cordially invited President Nixon to visit the Republic of Korea and President Nixon accepted the invitation with pleasure. They agreed that the visit would take place at a time of mutual convenience.
Note: The joint statement was released at San Francisco, Calif.