Richard Nixon
August 03, 1969

Remarks at Andrews Air Force Base on Returning From the Global Tour.
Mr. Vice President, Members of the Cabinet, Members of the Senate and House, members of the diplomatic corps, and all of our friends who have been so kind to come to the airport on this rainy evening:
It seems the way to get weather is for me to return from either Europe or Asia. When I returned from Europe it snowed and when I returned from Asia it rained. So that means from now on I will be called "Nixon the Rainmaker." That is better than being called a "troublemaker."
I do want to say in response to your very warm remarks of welcome that we had some wonderful receptions around the world in seven countries. I knew those receptions were not for me as an individual, but for what this Nation stands for.
America has millions of friends in this world and we can be proud of America, and I was proud to represent America as I visited these nations and saw friendship for America in the eyes of people on the streets of cities in the seven countries that you have mentioned.
Also I would like to point out that on this trip the theme was as pretty well stated as it could be, by the Acting President of India, when he proposed a toast a few nights ago, that it was a trip in quest of peace. And that was the theme of this trip.
What we were trying to do was to bring this message to the world that the United States wants to bring peace to the world and that we want to do our fair share in working with others to maintain peace in the world. That feeling, believe me, is shared by people all over this world.
Another thought that occurs to me is with regard to the visit to Bucharest. This was the most moving experience that I have had in traveling to over 60 countries in the world, not that all the other countries were not also extremely exciting and interesting and receptive, but here in this country in which we have an entirely different political philosophy from our own, people were out by the hundreds of thousands, not ordered by their government, but cheering and shouting--not against anybody--but simply showing their affection and friendship for the people of the United States.
This means to me one simple thing: that deep differences in political philosophy cannot permanently divide the peoples of the world. This has a great meaning to the future. It means that we can live in peace in the world, live in peace with other nations who may have different political philosophies.
Finally, another thought occurs to me. I want to bring this to a conclusion because I know this has been a long day for you and this is the end of a 24-hour day for me. It is raining, so under the circumstances, I do want to leave, however, one final thought that you touched upon.
In Bucharest I noted that so many, particularly of the young people, held up a newspaper picture of the astronauts landing on the moon, and everywhere we went it was the same. Some way, when those two Americans stepped on the moon, the people of this world were brought closer together.
As I stand here today, I really feel in my heart that it is that spirit, the spirit of Apollo, that America can now help to bring to our relations with other nations. The spirit of Apollo transcends geographical barriers, and political differences. It can bring the people of the world together in peace.
Thank you and good night.
Note: The President spoke at 11:23 p.m. at Andrews Air Force Base in response to the following remarks of welcome by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew:
Mr. President, it is indeed a privilege to welcome you back. This return from a successful trip in Asia in many ways represents a repetition of a return from a successful trip earlier this year in Europe. There is one distinct difference that I appreciate very much, and that is that the runway is not icy.
However, as successful as both those trips were, Mr. President, this one has a significant difference in that it began on a soaring of the spirit as you stood on the deck of the carrier Hornet and watched the astronauts return to safety again.
We could see mirrored in your face, sir, a reaction that was within each one of us, of pride and indeed, in awe, that man has come to this great accomplishment.
Mr. President, I think that spirit accompanied you on your trip throughout the Asian nations, to the Philippines, to Indonesia, to Thailand, and then that trip to Vietnam, where you visited our battleline troops. I think it was reflected on the faces of the troops and on the faces of the people of Asia, as they heard you say what I thought was your most significant remark, that we are not going to treat the Pacific Ocean as a barrier, but as a bridge.
Then after Vietnam, your visits to India and Pakistan and finally that wonderful experience that each of us shared with you when you went to Romania and received that tremendous outpouring of spirit that could not conceivably be arranged by any nation under any circumstances. It assured us that there is a brotherhood of man--a brotherhood of man that indicates that there is a brotherhood for peace-peace for all nations--and we should all strive for this.
We should all be determined that the people can prosper and grow together as long as the people's wishes are being met and I think that basically is the message that you so successfully put around the world, and we are so pleased to have you back and so proud of what you have accomplished.