Richard Nixon
December 29, 1971

Remarks Following Meetings With Chancellor Brandt of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Mr. Chancellor, Mr. Foreign Minister, ladies and gentlemen:
The Chancellor and I have just finished a days of very intensive discussions. Those discussions covered the whole range of bilateral problems between the United States and the Federal Republic and also international problems with particular emphasis, of course, on the problems of Europe.
I can say without qualification that the state of German-American relations is excellent at this time. I can also say that in terms of the other discussions that we have had, that we found substantial agreement, as the statement which has been issued to the press has indicated, in economic areas and also on the problem of maintaining adequate forces in Europe in our commitment to NATO.
With regard to that commitment, incidentally, I am today announcing the appointment of Ambassador Kennedy as our Ambassador to NATO.1This indicates, as I have told the Chancellor, the commitment that the United States has to NATO--the importance that we attach to that commitment, sending a man who has such broad experience, who has my total confidence, as our Ambassador to that very important post.
1A White House announcement of the intention to nominate Ambassador at Large David M. Kennedy as United States Permanent Representative on the Council of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was released on December 29, 1971, and is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 8, p. 9).
Finally, Mr. Chancellor, on a personal note, may I here, before American television, speak for all the American people in congratulating the Nobel Prize winner for 1971.
I hope and I believe that the talks that we have had, covering the whole range of world affairs, will contribute to peace in the years ahead for our two countries and for the world.
We are very complimented that you have chosen Florida for a brief vacation. We hope the waters are peaceful and that the fishing is good.
Note: The President spoke at his home in Key Biscayne, Fla.
On December 28, 1971, the President greeted Chancellor Brandt at a formal arrival ceremony at Homestead Air Force Base, Fla. On the same day, the President hosted a working dinner at his Key Biscayne residence for the Chancellor.
Following the President's remarks, Chancellor Brandt responded as follows:
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary, ladies and gentlemen:
I am most grateful to President Nixon that he gave us, Foreign Minister Scheel and me, the chance to meet and discuss, in all frankness, problems of common interest, our common position and responsibilities within the Atlantic Alliance, future relations between the enlarging European Community and the United States, East-West problems, and other problems of common concern.
Mr. President, you should know that we in Germany regard the United States as our not only most powerful but also, for other reasons, most important partner abroad, and we will do all we can to strengthen the ties of friendship which have been developed over the years.
I think in spite of many difficulties in one part of the world and the other, in 1971 we have made some progress in trying to make peace safer, and I think there is a chance that you and we, together with our friends, can make even better progress in 1972, without having any illusions and without underestimating the difficulties which are still ahead of us.
Thank you very much for your hospitality, Mr. President. And as far as my vacation is concerned, it is true that I will concentrate on fishing for a few days ahead of us. I have been in the States many times--only the second time I have been in Florida. And I am happy I can be back here in this wonderful part of the United States.
Thank you very much, Mr. President.