Richard Nixon
December 16, 1969

Remarks Following a Meeting With Representative Rogers C. B. Morton, Chairman, Republican National Committee.
Ladies and gentlemen:
There has been considerable speculation about the future of Rogers Morton, the national chairman of the Republican Party.
As you know, he is a Congressman from Maryland and he has been one who has been mentioned as possibly the strongest candidate to run for the Senate in Maryland in 1970.
It is time now to end that speculation, and I am going to end it and then see if the Congressman will corroborate what I say.
I believe that he would make an outstanding Senator. He has had 6 years in the House. I believe he, if he ran, would win, and we need him in the Senate.
However, I believe that he has been one of the most outstanding national chairmen that either party has had in many years. He has not only been loyal to the administration, but, more importantly, he is presenting a positive picture of the Republican Party across this Nation and has unified the party as no chairman in my memory has been able to do it in recent years.
Under the circumstances, after considering all the factors, I have made a decision--and it was a very close one when he asked me for my advice, not that my advice would have been absolutely, shall we say, decisive--that he can better serve not only his party and the Nation and the administration, but also, I think, serve his own interests by remaining as national chairman.
I requested that he remain as national chairman and he has agreed to do so. I am delighted with his decision from the standpoint of the party and the administration.
I regret that he cannot run for the Senate, but he assures me that he will find another very strong candidate for the Senate in Maryland.
Mr. Chairman, we will keep you right where you are.
Note: The President spoke at 10:35 a.m. in the Roosevelt Room at the White House.
The text of a news conference by Representative Morton on his decision to continue as chairman of the Republican National Committee was also released by the White House Press Office on December 16, 1969.