Richard Nixon
February 21, 1969

Remarks Announcing the Appointment of Donald M. Kendall as Chairman of the National Alliance of Businessmen.
I AM INTERRUPTING the press briefing by Mr. Ziegler for the purpose of making an announcement with regard to the National Alliance of Businessmen.
One of the major objectives of this administration, as you know, is to move people from welfare rolls to payrolls.
The organization in the Nation which has been most effective in a volunteer way in achieving this objective is the National Alliance of Businessmen. If its present goals are realized it may reach the number of 100,000. And beyond that, it already is operating in 50 cities and we are hoping that we may extend this operation to far more cities in the Nation.
In studying this organization and the excellent record it has made up to this point, I have found that what is vitally important is the leadership at the top, the leadership of an individual who knows the volunteer way, who has had the opportunity to practice it and who can inspire others to follow his example.
We have been able to get Mr. Don Kendall to assume this responsibility. Incidentally, his choice has been seconded by the present top people in the Alliance as one who can provide that kind of leadership.
I can only say in speaking of him that in the field of business he has never failed to increase sales throughout his career. In fact, he is generally known among his business colleagues as the man who pours it on. He has agreed that he is going to apply that same vitality and, incidentally, youth to this new assignment.
I am delighted that he is undertaking it. He will have the full cooperation of the President in this activity.
After I return from my trip abroad, a meeting will be held here of the top officials of the Alliance in order that I may indicate to them my support of this program and my complete backing for Mr. Kendall in carrying it out.
Note: The President spoke at 12:05 p.m. in the Fish Room at the White House. Mr. Kendall's response and a statement by the President on the appointment are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, P. 303).
An announcement, dated February 4, 1969, on the appointment of new metropolitan chairmen for the National Alliance of Businessmen is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, P. 214).
[APP Note:  Mr. Kendall was CEO of PepsiCo from 1971 to 1986.]