Richard Nixon
February 27, 1970

Executive Order 11512—Planning, Acquisition, and Management of Federal Space
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949, as amended, and as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. The Administrator of General Services (hereinafter termed "the Administrator") shall initiate and maintain plans and programs for the effective and efficient acquisition and utilization of federally owned and leased space located in the States of the United States or in the District of Columbia or in Puerto Rico (hereinafter termed "in the United States"), and for which the Administrator is responsible. The Administrator shall prepare and issue standards and criteria for the use of such space and shall periodically undertake surveys of space requirements and space utilization in the executive agencies and initiate actions and formulate programs to meet the essential space requirements of executive agencies. In carrying out these functions, the Administrator shall (a) coordinate proposed programs and plans for buildings and space with the Bureau of the Budget, (b) obtain from the Civil Service Commission, the Office of Emergency Preparedness, and the Department of Defense any information in the possession of those agencies which may bear upon such programs and plans, (c) coordinate proposed programs and plans for buildings and space in a manner designed to exert a positive economic and social influence on the development or redevelopment of the areas in which such facilities will be located, (d) seek the cooperation of the heads of the executive agencies concerned with any of the foregoing, and (e) annually submit long-range plans and programs for the acquisition, modernization, and use of space for approval by the President.
SEC. 2. (a) The Administrator, and the heads of executive agencies, shall be guided by the following policies for the acquisition, assignment, reassignment, and utilization of office buildings and space in the United States:
(1) Material consideration shall be given to the efficient performance of the missions and programs of the executive agencies and the nature and function of the facilities involved, with due regard for the convenience of the public served and the maintenance and improvement of safe and healthful working conditions for employees;
(2) Consideration shall be given in the selection of sites for Federal facilities to the need for development and redevelopment of areas and the development of new communities, and the impact a selection will have on improving social and economic conditions in the area. In determining these conditions the Administrator shall consult with and receive advice from the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Secretary of Commerce, and others, as appropriate;
(3) Maximum use shall be made of existing Government-owned permanent buildings which are adequate or economically adaptable to the space needs of executive agencies;
(4) Suitable privately owned space shall be acquired only when satisfactory Government-owned space is not available, and only at rental charges which are consistent with prevailing rates in the community for comparable facilities;
(5) Space planning and assignments shall take into account the objective of consolidating agencies and constituent parts thereof in common or adjacent space for the purpose of improving management and administration;
(6) The availability of adequate low and moderate income housing, adequate access from other areas of the urban center, and adequacy of parking will be considered; and
(7) Proposed developments shall be, to the greatest extent practicable, consistent with State, regional, and local plans and programs; and Governors, local elected officials, and regional comprehensive planning agencies shall be consulted in the planning of such developments.
(b) The Administrator shall plan, acquire, and manage space in the United States upon his determination that such actions will serve to improve the management and administration of governmental activities and services, and will foster the programs and policies of the Federal Government. Prior to making such determinations, the Administrator shall consult with the heads of the executive agencies concerned and take into account their requirements, consistent with the criteria stated here and his other responsibilities. The Administrator shall advise the agency head in writing of his intended course of action and notify him that in the event of disagreement the affected agency head may within thirty days make a written request for review of the matter, through the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, to the President.
SEC. 3. The heads of executive agencies shall (a) cooperate with and assist the Administrator in carrying out his responsibilities respecting buildings and space, (b) take measures to give the Administrator early notice of new or changing space requirements, (c) seek to economize in their requirements for space, and (d) review continuously their needs for space in and near the District of Columbia, taking into account the feasibility of decentralizing services or activities which can be carried on elsewhere without excessive costs or significant loss of efficiency.
SEC. 4. The provisions of this order shall be subject to applicable provisions of law (including applicable provisions of any reorganization plan).
SEC. 5. Executive Order No. 11035 of July 9, 1962, is hereby superseded.
RICHARD NIXON
The White House
February 27, 1970