Richard Nixon
February 17, 1972

Memorandum About the Federal Summer Employment Program for Youth.
Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
For many young Americans, particularly needy students, summer jobs can be the decisive factor in the completion of their education. This year, the Federal agencies can once again make that all-important difference, offering sound guidance on the choice of future careers for all who participate in the Federal Summer Employment Program for Youth.
Those who are engaged in this year's program can also gain practical work experience and a better understanding of how their Government serves the people. Agencies, in turn, can benefit from the contributions made by these enthusiastic, energetic young summer workers.
This year, many students will be employed as a result of successful competition in a nationwide summer employment examination, under merit staffing programs developed by agencies, and under the Federal Summer Intern Program. In addition, we must continue to provide opportunities for needy youths: therefore we have set once again the general goal successfully met last summer--employment of one needy youth for every 40 regular employees on your payroll.
I have asked the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission to again provide the leadership and guidelines for summer employment and to report to me on the accomplishments of the 1972 program; and I ask each of you to give personal support to this important investment in our future.
RICHARD NIXON
Note: On March 7, 1972, at the direction of the President, a meeting to launch the 1972 summer employment program for youth was held at the White House, with the Vice President as Chairman. Mayors of nine cities and representatives of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, National League of Cities, and National Alliance of Businessmen attended the meeting. On the same day, the White House released the transcript of a news briefing on the summer employment program by Laurence H. Silberman, Under Secretary, and Malcolm R. Lovell, Jr., Assistant Secretary for Manpower, Department of Labor.