Richard Nixon
February 02, 1971

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities.
To the Congress of the United States:
In this first year of the new decade, we have been working to establish a firm basis for a balanced national aeronautics and space program which is compatible with our national priorities, goals and resources and which insures continuing progress throughout the decade. 1970 has been a year of transition from past successes to new challenges.
The activities of our space program during the year are consistent with the recommendations I made in March for a balanced space program. Our goals are continued exploration, scientific knowledge and practical applications. The technology acquired through our space programs has many practical applications on earth ranging from communications, meteorology and navigation to agriculture, education and transportation.
Specific objectives guide our space endeavors. We should continue to explore the moon and increase the scientific return on the investment in the Apollo program. We should also continue to explore the planets of our solar system and the universe. We must strive to reduce the cost of space operations. We should try to expand our knowledge of man's ability to perform productively in the hostile environment of space and to relate this knowledge to uses here on earth. We must apply space-related technology to the critical assessment of our environment and to the effective use of our resources. We should also promote international cooperation in our space program by pursuing joint space ventures, exchanging scientific and technical knowledge, and assisting in the practical application of this knowledge. We are greatly encouraged by European interest in joining us in cooperative post-Apollo planning.
From our aeronautics activities have come substantial contributions to continued U.S. pre-eminence in civil aviation, major improvements in aeronautical services, and impressive developments in a sound SST program. This year has seen the initiation of new military aeronautics programs that will enhance our national security. We must consider other new means to insure that our national aeronautics program is given the opportunity and encouragement to contribute to our national well-being.
I am pleased to transmit to Congress this report of our national aeronautics and space activities during 1970. I take this opportunity to express my admiration for the men and women whose devotion, courage and creativity have made our aeronautics and space progress a source of national pride.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

February 2, 1971
Note: The President's message is printed in the report entitled "Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Transmitted to the Congress January 1971" (Government Printing Office, 115 pp.).