Richard Nixon
July 30, 1969

Remarks to American Troops of the 1st Infantry Division in Vietnam.
YOU ARE doing your duty and, I am sure, producing what will eventually be the basis for a lasting peace in the Pacific area.
I would like to say just a word about this war.
I know that you have had all of this indoctrination. I know that some of you, all of you, probably, read in the newspapers and hear on television and radio a debate over this war, why we got into it, how it is being conducted, and how are we going to end it.
I simply want to say to you that, as we all know, any war is difficult, particularly difficult for that man who is out there fighting. This war is the most difficult war any army has ever fought. Certainly, it is the most difficult war any army of the United States of America has fought. Because this is the first time in our history when we have had a lack of understanding of why we are here, what the war is all about, where we have had real division at home.
This is why I say that the men who have fought in this war, who fight courageously, who do their duty, day after day--they really deserve the thanks of the United States.
Because I think you know why you are here, and I would just like to summarize it in a word in the broadest sense before meeting some of you personally.
I just visited three countries in Asia, and in each of those countries I can tell you they are watching Vietnam. What happens in Vietnam, how this war is ended, may well determine what happens to peace and freedom in all of Asia.
I am not suggesting that each of three countries will go Communist in the event this war is not brought to a successful conclusion. I am saying this: If we can bring this war to an end, and an early end, and that is our goal, and if that war is ended in a way that the people of South Vietnam have a right to choose their own way, and that is all we are asking--if we do that, then the chance for all of the people of Asia to have a chance to have real peace in Asia, the possibility that we can discourage aggression and reduce the chances of more wars in the future--that is what we want to accomplish.
I have long believed this. I believe it now. I simply want you to know that I only hope that those of us who are the political leaders can be worthy of the men out here in the fighting line so that we can bring this war to a conclusion---bring it to a conclusion in a way that will be worthy of your service, of your sacrifices, of your--it seems to me for all of you--your great activity beyond the call of duty. I would say that to each and every man here whether he receives a medal or not.
And one final word. I suppose out here, as is always the case, you perhaps get tired of lectures. I don't mean to lecture now. But I do want you to know that we are going to record sometime the history of this time, and in that history it is going to be one of the most exciting periods in all the history of man--the landing on the moon, those three brave men who landed there.
But also out here in this dreary, difficult war, I think history will record that this may have been one of America's finest hours, because we took a difficult task and we succeeded.
You are doing your job. I can assure you we are going to try to do ours to see that you didn't fight in vain.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at Headquarters, 2d Brigade, 1st Infantry Division at Di An, 13 miles north of Saigon.