Richard Nixon
July 09, 1970

Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 4 of 1970: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1970, prepared in accordance with chapter 9 of title 5 of the United States Code. The plan would transfer to the Secretary of Commerce various functions relating to the oceans and atmosphere, including commercial fishery functions, and would establish a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the Department of Commerce. My reasons for transmitting this plan are stated in a more extended accompanying message.
After investigation, I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1970 is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 901 (a) of title 5 of the United States Code. In particular, the plan is responsive to section 901(a)(1), "to promote the better execution of the laws, the more effective management of the executive branch and of its agencies and functions, and the expeditious administration of the public business;" and section 901 (a) (3), "to increase the efficiency of the operations of the Government to the fullest extent practicable."
The reorganizations provided for in the plan make necessary the appointment and compensation of new officers as specified in section 2 of the plan. The rates of compensation fixed for these officers are comparable to those fixed for other officers in the executive branch who have similar responsibilities.
The reorganization plan should result in the more efficient operation of the Government. It is not practical, however, to itemize or aggregate the exact expenditure reductions which will result from this action.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

July 9, 1970
Note: Reorganization Plan 4 became effective on October 3, 1970.
On October 6, the President signed Executive Order 11564, transferring certain programs and activities to the Secretary of Commerce for the purpose of implementing the reorganization plan.