Richard Nixon
July 01, 1970

Executive Order 11541—Prescribing the Duties of the Office of Management and Budget and the Domestic Council in the Executive Office of the President
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes of the United States, including section 301 of title 3 of the United States Code, and pursuant to Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1970 (hereinafter referred to as "the Plan"), it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. (a) All functions transferred to the President of the United States by Part I of the Plan (including the function vested by section 102(f) of designating the officials of the Office of Management and Budget who shall act as Director during the absence or disability of the Deputy Director or in the event of a vacancy in the office of Deputy Director) are hereby delegated to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget in the Executive Office of the President. Such functions shall be carried out by the Director under the direction of the President and pursuant to such further instructions as the President from time to time may issue.
(b) All outstanding delegations, rules, regulations, orders, circulars, bulletins, or other forms of Executive or administrative action issued or taken by or relating to the Bureau of the Budget or the Director of the Bureau of the Budget prior to the effective date of this order shall, until amended or revoked, remain in full force and effect as if issued or taken by or relating to the Office of Management and Budget or the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
SEC. 2. (a) Under the direction of the President and subject to such further instructions as the President from time to time may issue, the Domestic Council in the
Executive Office of the President shall (1) receive and develop information necessary for assessing national domestic needs and defining national domestic goals, and develop for the President alternative proposals for reaching those goals; (2) collaborate with the Office of Management and Budget and others in the determination of national domestic priorities for the allocation of available resources; (3) collaborate with the Office of Management and Budget and others to assure a continuing review of ongoing programs from the standpoint of their relative contributions to national goals as compared with their use of available resources; and (4) provide policy advice to the President on domestic issues.
(b) The organizations listed herein are terminated, and the functions heretofore assigned to them shall be performed by the Domestic Council:
Council for Urban Affairs (Executive Order No. 11452 of January 23, 1969)
Cabinet Committee on the Environment (Executive Order No. 11472 of May 29, 1969, as amended by Executive Order No. 11514 of March 5, 1970) Council for Rural Affairs (Executive Order No. 11493 of November 13, 1969)
SEC. 3 This order shall be effective July 1, 1970.
RICHARD NIXON
The White House
July 1, 1970
NOTE: The Executive order was released at San Clemente, Calif.