Richard Nixon
July 21, 1971

Letter Accepting the Resignation of Glenn T. Seaborg as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission.
Dear Glenn:
It is with special regret that I accept your resignation as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission effective, as you have requested, upon a date to be determined. However, I would hope that you will continue as planned to head our Delegations to the Soviet Union in August and to Geneva and Vienna in September, even if your successor is confirmed and sworn in before the date of these trips. I would also hope that you could remain as a consultant for some time after these meetings are completed to insure the smoothest possible transition.
For ten years, three Presidents have had the benefit of your wisdom and counsel in making decisions which, increasingly, affect the daily lives and well-being of our fellow citizens. Thanks in large measure to your outstanding leadership during this time, the United States has maintained its position of preeminence in the field of atomic energy.
As a world famous chemist, scholar, and administrator, you have contributed in a unique and meaningful way to far greater understanding and application of the miracles of the atom. As you return to academic life, I am confident that your activities will bring new benefits to mankind while reflecting the highest credit upon yourself and your country. You may be certain that my warmest wishes and the deep admiration of your colleagues go with you.

Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON

[Honorable Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Washington, D.C. 20545]
Note: On the same day, the White House released an announcement of intention to nominate James R. Schlesinger as a member, and to designate him Chairman, of the Commission, and an announcement of intention to nominate William O. Doub as a member of the Commission. The two announcements are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 7, pp. 1069 and 1070).
Mr. Seaborg's letter of resignation, dated July 19, 1971, and released with the President's letter, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
I am writing to request that you accept my resignation as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission. This is in accordance with our understanding last year at the time of my reappointment, when I expressed the desire to return to my professorship at the University of California at Berkeley.
I should want to have the date of my resignation be at your convenience. I want to help my successor in every possible way, including the timing of the transfer of my responsibilities to him.
It has been a rewarding experience to serve you as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission. Your personal interest in the Commission's program has been a source of inspiration to me and I have particularly valued our fine personal relationship. I had no inkling when we first met in Chattanooga, Tennessee, nearly twenty-five years ago that we would, years later, share in such an interesting adventure.
Although we leave Washington with mixed feelings after so long a stay, having served under three Presidents, my family and I have anticipated for some time our return to California, and we look forward to our return home.
Respectfully,
GLENN T. SEABORG
[The President, The White House]