Richard Nixon
July 09, 1970

Executive Order 11546—Establishing the President's Commission for the Observance of the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the United Nations
WHEREAS the United Nations this year completes its first twenty-five years of existence; and
WHEREAS support of the United Nations and its principles and purposes as set forth in the Charter has been held by every Administration to be fundamental to United States policy; and
WHEREAS the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations is an occasion not only for commemoration but also for a searching reappraisal of the potential of the United Nations to promote international peace and stability in conditions of justice and progress, and the consideration of measures to make it more effective; and
WHEREAS the General Assembly has invited all Member States to take note of the observance of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary and to formulate such plans and programs as seem to them appropriate for promoting its objectives:
Now, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. Establishment of Commission. (a) There is hereby established the President's Commission for the Observance of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission").
(b) The Commission shall be composed of not more than forty-five members, as follows: (1) not more than thirty-seven members who shall be appointed by the President from public or private life, (2) four persons who are members of the Senate and are hereafter designated as members of the Commission by the President, and (3) four persons who are members of the House of Representatives and are hereafter designated as members of the Commission by the President. The President shall designate the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman from among the members of the Commission.
(c) No member of the Commission shall receive compensation from the United States by reason of service as a member of the Commission, but such members may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as may be authorized by law.
SEC. 2. Functions of the Commission. (a) In consultation with the Secretary of State, the Commission shall identify matters of overriding importance to the effectiveness of the United Nations and of United States participation therein; suggest new initiatives which would be particularly appropriate in this Anniversary year; study available opinion and background on these questions, both official and public; and prepare for the President recommendations to assist him in his determination of United States policy toward the United Nations. The Commission's initial recommendations to the President on these subjects shall be submitted in an interim report by September 15, 1970.
(b) The Commission shall, under the leadership of the Secretary of State, consult as appropriate. with United States Government agencies and bodies, and with private organizations, to promote the effective observance in the United States of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations.
(c) The Commission shall endeavor to convey to the American people a balanced and realistic understanding of the United Nations family of agencies, its activities, their beneficial potential for the United States and the rest of the world, and the prospects for progressive realization of this potential.
(d) Taking into account the actions taken at the Twenty-fifth General Assembly the Commission shall prepare a final report on its conclusions and recommendations and submit it to the President not later than April 30, 1971. The Commission shall terminate on the date of the submission of its final report.
SEC. 3. Assistance and Cooperation. (a) The Department of State is hereby designated as the agency which shall provide the Commission with necessary administrative services, staff support, and facilities.
(b) The Commission is authorized to request any agency of the Executive Branch of the Government to furnish the Commission such assistance, information, and advice as may be useful to it for the fulfillment of its functions under this order. Each agency is authorized, to the extent permitted by law and within the limits of available funds, to furnish such assistance, information, and advice to the Commission upon request of the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Commission.
RICHARD NIXON
The White House
July 9, 1970
NOTE: For an announcement of the establishment and membership of the Commission, see the preceding item.