Richard Nixon
June 22, 1971

Statement About House Approval of the Welfare Reform and Social Security Bill
TODAY marks a major legislative milestone in the history of welfare reform. Not only has the House of Representatives affirmed the principles of reform put forward by the Administration almost 2 years ago; in its constructive deliberations on this subject, it has strengthened and extended these principles. The Members of the House who supported H.R. 1, and in particular those on the Ways and Means Committee, have my personal and sincere thanks for their careful and responsible action.

H.R. 1 offers the Nation, at last, a way out of the present welfare morass. It establishes strong work requirements and work incentives. It provides coverage for the first time for workers whose earnings are inadequate to support their families, thus ending an unconscionable discrimination against millions of hard-working citizens throughout the Nation. Strong linkages are forged at every point under the new system between benefits and jobs for all employable recipients.
By establishing a national income standard for families with children, H.R. 1 represents a heartening step forward in building up levels of opportunity for our most valued asset---our children.
H.R. 1 also heralds a new day for older Americans. Reforming both social security and welfare programs, it strikes a blow against poverty for the elderly. Social security benefits will rise automatically in the future to protect against inflation, and recipients will be entitled to make and keep greater earnings without loss of benefits. Income assistance to the needy aged will be increased to $ 150 per month over a 3-year period and will be administered by the Social Security Administration on an efficient and equitable basis throughout the Nation.
It is my deeply felt hope that the Senate will move with dispatch now that welfare reform has passed the House. We cannot afford to delay any longer in our efforts to remedy the failures of the Nation's welfare programs and establish in their place an equitable and uniform system designed to build people up, rather than pull them down.