Richard Nixon
June 07, 1969

Remarks at Honolulu Enroute to a Meeting With President Nguyen Van Thieu of the Republic of Vietnam at Midway Island.
WE WANT to express our appreciation to all of you who have come out and given us such a warm welcome to Hawaii.
I also want to express my thanks to the Honor Guard--some of their children are here, I am sure--for their splendid symbolism of our Armed Forces here in Hawaii.
I can say from a personal standpoint that we have been looking forward to returning to this State. I only regret that it is for such a brief time.
I remember that when Mrs. Nixon and I visited here in the year 1951, we reached virtually all of the islands, and we took away memories that we have with us still, and Hawaii has always had a special place in our hearts as it has for everyone who has a chance to come here.
In that connection, I would like you to know that we are very happy that our two daughters, Tricia and Julie, could be with us, and David Eisenhower. None of them have been to Hawaii, and so I know that in 2 days they will learn to love this State as we learned to love it so many years ago.
I would like to say to those on the other islands who might be listening to this broadcast that I know that Oahu, of course, is the island that everybody comes to; but we remember Hawaii, the big island, and Kauai, the garden island, and Maul No-Ka-Oi with all of those memories in mind we only hope there will be a time when all of us can return for perhaps a vacation and to see them.
Now on a very serious note, as you know, this is one journey that will take me tomorrow to Midway. The purpose of that meeting has been well described in the press. I will not elaborate on it now, except to make this comment which is quite relevant to this State and the people in it.
From my own observation, there is no State and no people in any one of our States that has a greater interest in and a greater stake in the overall problem of peace in the Pacific than the people of Hawaii.
You know how tremendously important it is that we find a way to bring an end to the war in which we are now engaged in Vietnam and bring an end to that war in a way that it will promote the cause of real peace in the Pacific and not plant the seeds for another war.
We believe that this meeting in Midway will be one step in that direction--a very important step, as will be indicated by the results of that meeting and other events that will follow.
I only want to say, as I conclude, that when I think of this great Pacific State of ours, when I think of the people that are here and all that you represent, the feeling of good will, of people from all backgrounds living together in peace and in friendship, that is what we want to see all over this great Pacific area, that is the cause that we are going to Midway for. And we know that you wish us well and that your prayers are with us as we go. Thank you very much.
I also want to say, I tried to get them up here for the picture; but I am particularly appreciative of the fact that not only did Hiram Fong and Mrs. Fong come out to welcome us, but Governor Burns and all of the members of the congressional delegation, the two Senators and two Congressmen from the State of Hawaii. This is true bipartisanship. It proves that the cause of peace knows no partisanship, not in this State or any place in America.
Note: The President spoke at 1:15 p.m. at Hickam Field, Honolulu. Hiram L. Fong was United States Senator from Hawaii and John A. Burns was Governor of Hawaii.