Richard Nixon
June 22, 1971

Remarks on Arrival in Atlantic City, New Jersey.
WE WANT to express our very great appreciation for your warm welcome. I understood the meeting was inside, but I am glad it is out here. I think, too, that you know Mrs. Nixon and I celebrated our 31st wedding anniversary yesterday. We consider this a celebration. You should come to Atlantic City.
And we have a lot of distinguished guests with us who will be with us on Air Force One: your two Senators, Senator Case, Senator Harrison Williams-we will let you all take a bow so they can see you--Senator Case and Senator Williams; Governor Cahill; Congressman Sandman; Congressman "Doe" [Durward G.] Hall, from Missouri, one of the few doctors in the United States Congress; and then, of course, I mentioned the other Senators, but the senator here is "Hap" Farley.1Do you know what he said to me? Hap said a very nice thing when we came in. He said, "You know, Dick, you are in home territory in Atlantic City." We are glad to be here.
1State Senator Frank S. Farley.
I would just like to say this one word before we go into the meeting: I realize that in this great crowd here many of you are vacationing--I hope you are, and I hope the water is good, and I hope you enjoy the sun as I did in Florida a few days ago--but also I want you to know that for one who has the responsibility to serve as the President of this country, there is nothing that is more heartwarming than to come into the country to see a great crowd like this, people who are Republicans and Democrats, young people, older people, people in all walks of life; people who respect the office of the Presidency; people, also, who love this country and believe in America. It is good to be here.
I particularly want to say a word--I noticed a few signs along about young people and their future. If there is anything, one thing we all think about, it, of course, is about the lives that we are living.
I am going to talk to the doctors about many of the problems, as to how they can keep America physically healthy. But let me say that the greatest responsibility that those of us in public life have is to see to it that the young people that we see here--and we see so many, I see the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts, and the others-to see that they can grow up in a world and in a land that is at peace with the world. We are going to do that. We are going to accomplish that so that they can have what we have not had in our generation.
And most important, I can tell you, and I am sure that whether we are Democrats or Republicans on this platform, or whatever you are in the audience, as I speak to the doctors about physical health, there is another kind of health that is even more important. You can have a strong physical body and an empty shell with no spirit, no morality, no character, and you don't have an individual who really can contribute to his country.
Let America be strong--strong physically-and rich, but, above everything else, let's have the moral and spiritual strength that America has had from the time of its beginning.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at approximately 11:15 a.m. in front of the Chalfonte-Haddon Hall Hotel.