Richard Nixon
June 24, 1974

Letter Accepting the Resignation of Peter M. Flanigan as Assistant to the President.
Dear Peter:
It is with the deepest regret and a personal sense of sadness that I accept your resignation as Assistant to the President and Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy, effective on a date to be determined.
While I have long known of your intention to return to private life, nevertheless, I am always reluctant to see so valued a friend and associate depart. You know of my profound admiration for your splendid achievements over the past five years, and I shall not dwell on them at length. Let me say, however, that of the many men and women who have served our Administration, few can match--and none exceed--the exceptional skills, energy and dedication you brought to your duties.
Through our early association in the campaigns, your work from 1969 to 1971 in the domestic field and, still more recently in the area of international economics and trade, I have always had full confidence in your abilities to deal with complex problems with immense effectiveness and unfailingly good judgement. It is with a particular sense of satisfaction that I recall the key roles you have played in such diverse areas as the transition from the draft to an all-volunteer armed forces, and the progress we have made toward reform of the international economic system. Throughout, we have shared a common commitment to a strong and prosperous America in a world at peace, and it has been a constant source of reassurance to me to have your assistance and productive support in these efforts. I shall always treasure your loyal friendship and your superb service to our Party, this Administration and to our Nation.
As you depart, I want you to know how much I appreciate your offer to devote part of your time in the future to public service. You may be certain we will take advantage of your generosity. Pat joins with me in extending to Brigid and you our heartfelt good wishes for every success and happiness in the years ahead.

Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON
Note: The text of Mr. Flanigan's letter of resignation, released with the President's letter, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
Since the formation of New Yorkers for Nixon in 1959, my participation in your campaigns and in your Administrations has been the most stimulating and rewarding experiences of my life. I am grateful for the opportunity to serve the Nation, and proud that the opportunity has been as part of your Presidency.
You may recall our conversation at Camp David over a year ago when I said that the time had come for me to return to private life. You urged me to delay that decision for a few months. The months having become more than a year, the reasons for my departure have become more pressing. Therefore, I hereby submit my resignation as Assistant to the President and Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy, to be effective at your earliest convenience.
Again, Mr. President, let me thank you for the opportunity of serving you and your Administration. I will always consider that, and your trust in me that it indicates, a high honor. And I will cherish the knowledge that I have had a part in the great contributions, both at home and in foreign affairs, which you have made for our Country. If at any time in the future I can, in my private capacity, be of further service, I would be pleased to do so.
Sincerely yours,
PETER M. FLANIGAN