Richard Nixon
June 18, 1974

Remarks on Departure From Jordan.
Your Majesty:
Over the past 27 years, Mrs. Nixon and I have had the opportunity of visiting most of the countries of the world, and I want you to know that in no country in the world have we received what we believe is a warmer reception, a more friendly reception than we have received in Jordan.
We can also say that as we have traveled through the countries of the Mideast, we have been enormously impressed by the respect and affection for the country we represent, the United States of America. And the reason that that respect and affection exists, I believe, is because the people that we saw, both the leaders and people, recognize that we represented a nation that was dedicated to peace. They recognized that the journey we were taking to their countries was in the interest of peace. And if there is one fact that stands out after traveling through these countries that we have visited, it is this: The leaders of the nations that we visited, like yourself, Your Majesty, are dedicated to finding a way to peace, and just as important, the people that we saw--and we saw literally millions of people in five nations--are dedicated to peace.
They are dedicated to peace because they have seen that war solves no problems. Four wars in 30 years have brought nothing but hatred, distrust, and then more war. And now it is time to try a different way, a way that is sometimes more difficult--difficult from the standpoint of the statesmen to wage--than to wage war. And that is to try the way of peace, and we are embarked on that path.
As far as the United States is concerned, we will play an active role to the extent that the nations in this area want us to play an active role, and we have found in our visit that each of them welcomes a U.S. role in attempting to find a solution to these basic problems that exist and which could be the causes for more conflict. More important, I believe, that as we conclude this journey, I can say that while the problems ahead are still enormously difficult, while the steps that we have taken, though important and very difficult because they were the first steps, nevertheless are only the beginning of a much longer journey.
This is the last stop on a very long trip, but it is only the beginning of a much longer journey, a journey which, we trust, in the end will bring us to the goal of a just and lasting peace in this part of the world, because that peace will serve not just your country, Your Majesty, not just the other nations who are your neighbors, but it will serve all nations in the world, and that is what we all desire.
And finally, may I say that we, speaking in behalf of all your American guests, we express appreciation for the welcome you have given us, and we look forward to the time when we can return, return to visit with you again. And we trust that when we do return, the goal that both you and I have talked about for so many years that we have known each other, the goal of a just and lasting peace, will have been achieved.
Note: The President spoke at 4: 10 p.m. at Amman Airport.
King Hussein responded as follows:
Mr. President:
It is a very high honor indeed for me to speak on behalf of all the people of Jordan in these moments to thank you, sir, for visiting with us, to salute anew one of the greatest men of our time, not only in terms of your courage and wisdom but particularly in terms of your dedication to the cause of peace, not only in this part of the world but in the world as a whole, and the betterment of mankind.
It is an honor for me to have had the opportunity to welcome you to Jordan, on behalf of the people of Jordan, as the great President of the United States of America.
Our pride has been enormous over the years in the very close relations of friendship and cooperation that have existed between us. It has indeed been a "Journey for Peace," and may we wish you, sir, from our hearts, every success in your future endeavors along the path of peace.
May I assure you that we will ever be proud to cooperate most closely with you, sir, and with your government, for the eventual establishment of a just, honorable, and durable peace in this part of the world that could be our present for a better life and a better future for the generations that will follow us.
On behalf of the Queen and for myself and on behalf, in particular, of every member of our Jordanian family, we wish you continued success, sir, in your great mission in leading the great people of the United States, and we look forward to a time when we might meet again in Jordan.
We hope we will be more fortunate in terms of a longer period of time. So many of my countrymen throughout my country wish to show you our accomplishments and have the opportunity to show their feelings towards you.
Let's hope that in the future we will have another chance. It has been an honor to welcome you, sir, and Mrs. Nixon. We wish you a safe journey home and every continued success, and God bless you.
Earlier in the day, the President and Mrs. Nixon called on members of the Royal family and Prime Minister and Mrs. Zayd al-Rifai at Zahran Palace in Amman. They then attended a "Beating of the Retreat" at 4th Division Headquarters.