Richard Nixon
June 10, 1974

Remarks on Arrival at Salzburg, Austria.
Chancellor Kreisky, Mr. Foreign Minister, all of our distinguished guests:
We are very grateful for your very warm words and for the welcome we have received here in Austria, which is world famed for its hospitality. As you pointed out, we had the privilege of spending a day in Salzburg preparing for our first summit meeting in Moscow just 2 years ago. That journey not only created a new relationship and a new direction insofar as the two major powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, were concerned but it also contributed to a lessening of tension, as you have indicated, and, we believe, to peace for all nations in the world.
And now tomorrow, just 2 years later, we will be spending another day in Salzburg preparing for a trip to the Mideast. Every nation in the world has a stake in maintaining peace in the Mideast, and we trust that this journey, just as the one 2 years ago, will contribute not only to peace in that area but to peace generally for all nations in the world.
Mr. Chancellor, we want to express appreciation on behalf not only of the United States but for all nations for the part that Austria is playing in furnishing the largest contingent for the U.N. force which is preserving the area in the Golan Heights which has resulted from the disengagement talks between Syria and Israel.
And I, finally, want to say that tomorrow, I shall look forward to having the opportunity to meet with you again and to meet with the Foreign Minister to get your views, not only on the problems of the Mideast but on the problems of Europe and on international problems generally. We found our talks very useful and very helpful 2 years ago, and I am sure that you can provide insight into these problems on this occasion as well.
And, in a sense, I think we can say that this great free and independent nation, Austria, now symbolizes a bridge between East and West, a bridge of peace.
Note: The President spoke at 10:34 p.m. at Salzburg Airport in response to the welcoming remarks of Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs was Rudolph Kirchschlager.
Chancellor Kreisky welcomed the President in German. His remarks were translated by an interpreter as follows:
Mr. President:
I would like to welcome you and Mrs. Nixon, as well as your party, on behalf of the Austrian Government on Austrian soil.
I welcome you in the city of Salzburg. When you were here last time, that was shortly before your trip to the Soviet Union, which promoted so successfully the lessening of tension throughout the world. This time, you have come to Salzburg before your journey to Cairo and to other countries in the Middle East, and we hope that you will be a pacemaker for peace in that part of the world.
It is very fortunate, as I also found recently in Moscow, that the world powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, are making such strenuous efforts for the maintenance of peace in the world, and in that endeavor, we wish you all the best luck.
So once again, welcome to Austria.