Richard Nixon
March 13, 1971

Statement About United States Prisoners of War and Missing in Action in Southeast Asia
IT IS appropriate that, as the one solemn note on this evening's program, the Gridiron Club has chosen a matter of deep humanitarian concern to all Americans-the plight of more than 1,600 U.S. military men captured or missing in Southeast Asia. Some of our men have been in prisoner-of-war camps for more than 6 years, many with no word ever to their families. Many of the families endure the anguish of not knowing whether their man is dead or alive.
There are many kinds of heroism in wartime: the raw courage of the soldier or marine in the field; the skill under pressure of the air crew in combat; the dedication of the corpsman going after the wounded under fire. Another kind of heroism is that imposed in meeting the ordeal of prolonged captivity.
The three men1standing before you have survived that test---but they know, and we all know, that there are hundreds of others who continue to endure prolonged confinement. We salute these three men tonight, and in doing so we honor their comrades who remain in enemy hands, and the many who are missing. And also we honor their comrades who have given their lives to the service of our Nation.
1Col. Norris M. Overly, USAF, Lt. Robert F. Frishman, USN, and M. Sgt. Daniel L. Pitzer, USA, former prisoners of war in Southeast Asia.
I know all of us are concerned about the problem of those who are prisoners of war or missing in action. As journalists many of you have reported on this humanitarian problem. Growing public interest and concern about our POW's stems to a large extent from what the news media have done. Your reporting has brought information to citizens around the world and comfort to the families by letting them know these are not forgotten men, far from it. We believe that some of the progress that has been made in obtaining information about those captured in Southeast Asia results from the awakening of public opinion as a result of your news reports.
All of us are concerned also about your American journalist colleagues who are missing or captured in Southeast Asia, as well as the dozen other journalists of other nations who may be in Communist hands.
I fervently hope that all Americans will continue to support efforts to obtain the release of all our prisoners as soon as possible, as I proposed on October 7, 1970. So let us join our prayers to this purpose. And let us give it our continued dedication and continued public understanding, for the sake of the prisoners, for the sake of their families, and for the sake of human decency.
Note: The statement, released at Key Biscayne, Fla., was read at the Gridiron Club dinner in Washington, D.C., by Secretary of State William P. Rogers.
The Gridiron Club is an organization of 50 Washington newspapermen that presents each year an evening of satire in song.
On March 19, 1971, the President signed H.J. Res. 16 and Proclamation 4038, designating March 21-27 as National Week of Concern for Americans Who Are Prisoners of War or Missing in Action.