Richard Nixon
March 16, 1970

Statement About the Community Mental Health Centers Amendments of 1970
S. 2323, which I have approved is significant and major health legislation for the Nation. I regret that in signing it I must express serious reservations about some of its provisions. My reservations do not apply to the basic concept of the Community Mental Health Centers program which the legislation would extend, and which I strongly endorse.
By June 30, 1970, almost 500 mental health centers will have been funded to serve communities with a total population of more than 75 million people. Two hundred and twenty-five of these centers are already operating.
The Community Mental Health Centers Amendments of 1970 will make it possible for more communities to share in the effort to change and improve the quality of mental health services. I am especially pleased that it provides increased assistance and incentives for urban and rural poverty areas which have not been able to raise sufficient funds to secure Federal grant support.
This legislation will also strengthen Federal support in solving the major mental health problem of narcotic addiction and alcoholism as an integral part of the network of community mental health centers.
This administration is firmly committed to the continuation of this program. However, this bill departs from the proposal which the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare submitted to the Congress in a number of respects which are of real concern.
First, I believe it is a serious mistake to authorize appropriations, as S. 2523 does, in amounts which are far above those likely to be appropriated. Even under existing law, recent appropriations have been far below the authorized amounts, and to continue and even increase these unrealistic authorizations creates expectation which will turn into disappointment.
Second, the bill would require that every individual grant for construction or staffing of community mental health centers be approved by the National Advisory Mental Health Council.
While we support a role for the Advisory Council in the development of broad policy and recommendations on research and training grants, this procedure will complicate the decision process and create unnecessary barriers to the development of comprehensive community health programs.
Third, I regret to see that this legislation moves away from our goal of system reform and simplification of Federal grant programs.
This administration has sought to avoid creation of new grant categories, and, instead, to consolidate and simplify grant programs. S. 2523 goes counter to this desirable principle by creating two new categories of separate grants---one for facilities and services for the mental health of children and the other for consultative services. Certainly there is a pressing need for increased mental health services for children, but I feel strongly that these services should be provided within the total framework of comprehensive mental health services, and not through a separate new categorical program. I expect this authority to be administered as an integral part of the network of community mental health centers, thus avoiding further fragmentation of our scarce mental health manpower and services.
Despite these reservations, I am signing S. 2523 to assure continuation of the vital programs included in the Community Mental Health Centers Act. However, I am asking the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare to submit legislation to repeal the requirement that all grants be approved by the National Advisory Mental Health Council. I urge its early and favorable consideration by the Congress so that this program may move forward unimpeded by this cumbersome requirement.
Note: As enacted, S. 2523, approved March 13, 1970, is Public Law 91-211 (84 Stat. 54).