Richard Nixon
March 19, 1969

Remarks on Presenting the Boy of the Year Award
TODAY I am most honored to present the award to the Boy of the Year of the Boys' Clubs. This award is presented annually, but I have a special interest in it because I served as chairman of the Boys' Clubs of America before coming to the office which I presently hold.
On several occasions over those 5 years that I served as chairman of the Boys' Clubs I presented this award. It is a great honor for me to present it here at the White House to the Boy of the Year.
I hand you the plaque and I will read the citation here:
"Presented to Perry Joseph Ludy, chosen from the more than 800,000 members of the Boys' Clubs of America as Boy of the Year for 1969 in recognition of superlative service to his home, church, school, community, and Boys' Club. Perry typifies juvenile decency in action."
Now, that plaque reads very well, but I would like to add just an informal word with regard to Perry and his remarkable record. He is 17 years of age. He was president of his junior class and has been a leader in school activities in his high school. He was all-State in both basketball and track. He teaches a Sunday school class. He helps his mother in handling many of the household duties and giving leadership to the younger members of the family.
In addition to that he has participated in a number of activities in his community whenever he is called upon, not only the Boys' Clubs, where he has served in a number of very important positions, but also in drives for other volunteer organizations in his city of Oxnard.
Now, with all of this Perry has managed to be in the top 5 percent of his class in high school. You can see, therefore, why he is the Boy of the Year, not only for Oxnard, California, but for the United States of America. We congratulate him. And with this award, not only goes the plaque but a $1,000 scholarship from the Reader's Digest; and I am sure that in view of that athletic accomplishment, you will probably get another scholarship, too.
MR. LUDY. Thank you, Mr. President. I would like to make this presentation to you, Mr. President. It is a life honorary membership to the Boys' Clubs of America, and also this is a replica of California, and it is presented by the Oxnard Boys' Club of Oxnard, California.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, thank you very much. We wish you the very best. Where are you going to college? Have you decided yet?
MR. LUDY. No, sir, I have not decided. I have cut my list down to about six schools now. I am interested in pre-med.
THE PRESIDENT. You are going to be a doctor perhaps?
MR. LUDY. I hope so, yes.
THE PRESIDENT. You have cut your list down to six? For the boys at the top of their class with leadership capabilities this is a seller's market right now, isn't it? I can see that they would all want you. And we wish you the best.
Note: The President spoke at 1:50 a.m. in the Roosevelt Room at the White House. A White House release giving additional information on Mr. Ludy is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, p. 438).