Richard Nixon
March 15, 1969

Remarks at the American Legion's 50th Anniversary Dinner.
Commander Doyle, and all of the distinguished guests at the head tables, and all of the distinguished guests at this dinner here in Washington, which the American Legion has been giving for so many years to the Members of Congress:
I want you to know that the Commander, having apologized for what he was wearing--what do you think about what I am wearing?
I want to assure you that, as I told the Commander as we were coming in, only the fact that I had agreed several months ago to attend the annual Gridiron dinner, where I am to speak later this evening--and that is a white tie affair over at the Statler Hotel--only that made it impossible for me to be here with you at this dinner. But if you come back next year, I promise this will come first and the Gridiron will come second.
If I could be permitted just a few brief words before returning to the dinner at the Statler, first a recollection: It is rather hard for me to realize that I have been a member of the American Legion going back to the year 1946, and also hard for me to realize that I have attended--and I think, Commander, you will find this is the case--I have attended 18 of these dinners in Washington, D.C., and I think perhaps have spoken to the American Legion Convention more than any living American at the present time.
I won't make the same speech tonight. But I feel very much at home here. I feel very much at home because I know so many of you. I visited your States. I know what you stand for. I know your strong convictions. And right now, incidentally,
I want to express my appreciation for some resolutions that you passed today supporting my national defense policy-our national defense policy.
And having spoken of that policy, could I say a word with regard to the very moving ceremony that I have just participated in?
Fifty years ago this organization was founded, and through 50 years it has served the Nation well, served it in so many ways that many Americans are not aware, but particularly in a way that I am particularly aware, and that is in the cause of keeping the Nation strong-strong militarily, strong spiritually, strong in every way--so that America could lead in the cause for peace.
I think sometimes we fail to understand that only through strength can this great Nation lead for peace, and it is that kind of strength that we want.
As I tried to emphasize, as I was announcing the very difficult decision, one that many with great honesty disagreed with me on, perhaps some in this room, a decision with regard to the antiballistic missile, the purpose of our strength was not in any sense a threat to any other nation, but I know that the strength of America is so essential for those who will be meeting with others in various parts of the world over these next few years in conferences that will determine whether we have war or peace.
My friends, I simply want to say this: Whoever is President of the United States, whether it is the man standing before you today, or whether it is his successor, let us be sure that whenever our President sits at a conference table with any other nation that the United States is never a second-rate military power.
This is not said with any belligerence. It is only said in the sense that a strong nation can speak of its beliefs and what it is willing to do in order to protect those beliefs and to stand for them.
And now a word about that ceremony. A few years ago, as Vice President of the United States, I participated in the occasion when the Unknown Soldier from World War II and the Unknown Soldier from Korea were buried at the Tomb of the Unknowns.
I will never forget that day and the thoughts that ran through my mind on that occasion. And then on my recent trip to Europe, I laid a wreath on behalf of all the American people at a Tomb of an Unknown Soldier in London, and another one at the Tomb of an Unknown Soldier in Rome, and another at the Tomb of an Unknown Soldier at the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
I thought of all of them and of all of ours. And I realized how great our responsibility was, yours and mine, to see to it that this great Nation meets its responsibility in the world to maintain our strength so that we can negotiate the differences between nations that may possibly avoid another war, and thereby see to it that the day will come when it will not be necessary for us to bring home men, whether unknown or known, bring them home after having fought and died in a nation's wars. We feel that way particularly about our own.
But also we as Americans feel that about every other person in the world. When you think of a young man, and I have seen them in Korea, 18, 19, 20, so young, all their hopes and their ideals and all their lives ahead of them and then that life snuffed out; whether it is an American boy, or a French boy, or an Italian boy, or a Russian boy--whoever that boy is--we want the kind of a world that he can grow up in in peace with all the other peoples of the world.
That is what I believe. That is what the Legion stands for. That is why you are for strength. And I pledge to you that backed by the strong positions that you have taken, we will maintain America's military strength and from that position of strength, not with arrogance, not with belligerence, we will attempt to develop those new channels which can lead to peace in the world. I believe it is possible.
So I thank you for the opportunity to be here to share with you briefly these thoughts and to tell you that when I joined the Legion--and I was young then, in 1946, I ran for Congress that year--I was proud to be a member of the Legion. I have been proud of my membership ever since. And I will be proud to be with you at your convention next year.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 9:02 p.m. at the Sheraton Park Hotel in Washington. William C. Doyle was National Commander of the American Legion.
Prior to his remarks, President Nixon pressed a remote control button activating a new lighting system for the Tomb of the Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery. The $100,000 system and the $25,000 to maintain it were the Legion's 50th anniversary gift to the Nation.