Richard Nixon
March 12, 1969

Message to the Senate Transmitting Conventions for the Protection of Intellectual and Industrial Property.
To the Senate of the United States:
I transmit herewith, for the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification, (1) a copy of the Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization, signed at Stockholm on July 14, 1967, and (2) a copy of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, as revised at Stockholm on July 14, 1967. I transmit also, for the information of the Senate, the report of the Secretary of State with respect to the Conventions.
The Conventions remained open for signature until January 13, 1968. During that period the Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization was signed on behalf of 51 States, including the United States, and the Paris Convention was signed on behalf of 46 States, including the United States. Both Conventions remain open for accession.
(1) Convention Establishing a World Intellectual Property Organization. Two significant services will be rendered by the new organization. First, it will provide a coordinated administration for the various intellectual property Unions presently administered by the Secretariat, the United International Bureaus for the Protection of Intellectual Property, and through such administration, render an economical and efficient service to the Member States and the interests protected by the Unions. Second, it will promote the protection of intellectual property, not only for Member States of the intellectual property Unions, but also for the states which, while not members of the Unions, are parties to the World Intellectual Property Organization Convention. This is of particular importance since a forum will thus be provided for the advancement of industrial property and copyright protection on a worldwide basis.
(2) Revision of the Paris Convention For the Protection of Industrial Property. Administrative and structural reforms in the Paris Convention have long been overdue, and the modernization of the Union which has been accomplished by the Stockholm revision will be of importance in expanding the protection of industrial property.
A limited amendment to one substantive provision of the Paris Convention was also effected at the Conference. This amendment would accord to applications for inventors' certificates of the Eastern European countries the right of priority presently accorded to patent applications, provided that the Eastern European countries maintain a dual system of both inventors' certificates and patents and that both are available to foreign nationals. Inclusion of this provision is considered helpful to furthering industrial property relations with Eastern European countries.
The Stockholm Act of the Paris Convention and the World Intellectual Property Organization Convention will make a significant contribution to the protection of the foreign intellectual property rights of American nationals. I recommend that the Senate give early and favorable consideration to the Conventions submitted herewith and give its advice and consent to their ratifications.
RICHARD NIXON
The White House
March 12, 1969
Note: The texts of the conventions and the report of the Secretary of State are printed in Senate Executive A (91st Cong., 1t sess.).