Richard Nixon
May 03, 1969

Remarks in Columbia, S.C., During a Visit With Former Governor and Mrs. James Byrnes.
IF I COULD HAVE your attention for just a moment:
It has been a very great honor and privilege for Mrs. Nixon, for me, and for the Members of the Senate and the House, to come here to join in this tribute to Governor Byrnes and to Mrs. Byrnes.
I think, really, the character of this wonderful family is indicated when the Governor said, as we came into the house and wished him happy birthday, that he wanted to make clear that the main purpose of this day was not to celebrate his birthday, but the 63d wedding anniversary with Mrs. Byrnes.
So we honor that wonderful family relationship.
I understand the Governor's secret, and Mrs. Byrnes told it to me. We asked, did they ever have an argument in 63 years, and she said, "Yes, now and then," but they always had a rule that before the day ended they kissed and made up.
I want to leave one thought with regard to the Governor as we honor him:
I look back over the men that I have known around the world and in this country, and I have known great Congressmen, Senators, Governors, Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States, Secretaries of State, and men who have served in wartime as the top advisers to the President of the United States. But never in American history has one man held more high offices with more distinction than Governor Byrnes of South Carolina.
Note: The President spoke at 12:43 p.m. in Columbia, S.C., at the home of former Governor James F. Byrnes. He and Mrs. Nixon stopped en route to Louisville, Ky., for the Kentucky Derby to congratulate the Governor and Mrs. Byrnes on their 63d wedding anniversary and the Governor's 90th birthday.
Governor Byrnes served as Representative 1911-1925, Senator 1931-1941, Governor of South Carolina 1951-1955, Justice of the United States Supreme Court 1941-1942, Head of the Office of Economic Stabilization 1942-1943, Director of the Office of War Mobilization 1943-1945, and Secretary of State 1945-1947.
Following the President's remarks, Governor Byrnes spoke as follows:
Mr. President:
I address you as Mr. President because last fall I told you that I hoped when you came again to South Carolina I could greet you as
"Mr. President." I do so today.
I thank you from the bottom of my heart for your honoring me by coming to visit my home. I will never forget this day; I will never forget you.