Richard Nixon
May 06, 1969

Remarks at the Swearing In of William H. Brown III as a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
WE ARE here today for the swearing in of the member of the Commission, and then I will make an announcement after that about Mr. Brown's appointment.
He will be sworn in by an old friend, Judge Hyde.
Mrs. Brown, would you hold the Bible and stand here?
[At this point, Judge DeWitt S. Hyde of the District of Columbia Court of General Sessions administered the oath of office. The President then resumed speaking.]
Now, if the Senators and others would come here, all of you who would like to congratulate Mr. Brown, then I will say a word and leave him to the press.
In making the appointment of Mr. Brown to this Commission, I did so with the full knowledge that he was a man who was uniquely qualified for it. He comes from Philadelphia. I suppose we could describe him as a Philadelphia lawyer, because he is a lawyer. But he is a Philadelphia lawyer in a much broader sense than we usually think of that term.
He knows the law. He is an expert in the law. But he also has what I would call a spirit of brotherly love which the city of Philadelphia has been so long associated with.
Combining that legal expertise with a deep dedication to the principle of equality of opportunity for all people in this country, an equal chance for all people, I think these are the unique attributes that we need, not only as a member of the Commission, but as Chairman of the Commission.
I am delighted to be able to appoint a man so well qualified, so full of dedication, to this very important position.
We wish him and the members of the Commission well. I know that, having had a chance to talk to him, he will provide the leadership that this administration wants in this vitally important field.
Now, I will leave you for your first press conference as Chairman of the Commission here in this very pleasant place.
Note: The President spoke at 4: 15 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House.
An announcement on March 13, 1969, of Mr. Brown's nomination to the Commission is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, P. 400).
The text of a news conference held by Chairman Brown following the ceremony was released on the same day.