Richard Nixon
May 17, 1969

Remarks on Presenting the Medal of Honor to CWO Frederick E. Ferguson and Sp4c. Thomas J. Kinsman, USA.
Ladies and gentlemen:
This is a proud day for the men who have received the highest award that this Nation can give to a man in the Armed Forces.
It is a proud day for their parents, for the Armed Forces, for this Nation, and for me personally, and also in my official capacity as President of the United States of America.
This is Armed Forces Day, and all over America today Americans will be reminded of what we owe to the young men who serve in the Armed Forces of the United States.
These two men symbolize that service because they have rendered service in the highest tradition, far beyond the call of duty.
But as I make these awards to them, and as I stand here in the presence of their families, I want to say that I personally and, I think, all of the people who witnessed this ceremony on this magnificent day on the White House lawn are proud to be Americans as we see these men and the families that helped to produce them.
We are proud to be Americans because, first, we recognize that only a fine family and a fine background could produce men who, under the very gravest circumstances, rose to the heights of bravery.
We are proud also for another reason, for what these men were fighting for; not for glory, not for conquest, not for an inch of territory or a concession, or for conquering any other people, but for the cause of peace with freedom, which has been the cause for which young Americans have fought and died in World War I, in World War II, in Korea, and now in Vietnam.
Sometimes we forget this. Sometimes, as we hear critics of all wars, and particularly of this war, comment upon America's role in the world, we forget that the American goal is a very great goal, an unselfish goal.
Yes, we are concerned about our own freedom and we recognize that our freedom and our peace is very closely tied with the freedom and peace for others.
We recognize that what happens in Vietnam, halfway around the world, and whether Americans meet their responsibility there, may affect the future of not only Vietnam, not only the other nations in the Pacific, but the future of America itself.
Therefore, on this Armed Forces Day, I simply say to Warrant Officer Ferguson and to Specialist Kinsman, thank you for being such great Americans under fire, and for reminding us of the fact that we sometimes forget--that Americans in this century have had to go into war not because we wanted war, but because we wanted peace.
We have had to go into war not because we wanted conquest but because we didn't want it; because we wanted every nation in this world to be and to have the right to choose its own way without conquest and without aggression.
What a great goal you have fought for. What a great example you have set for us. You have made us proud to be Americans, proud of our flag, and, of course, proud of you.
Thank you.
Incidentally, when their parents and our two award winners came into my office, I asked each father who was primarily responsible for the fact that these men had developed into such fine Americans. And in each case, they said, "Mother was responsible."
[The texts of the two citations follow.]
THE PRESIDENT of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, March 3, 1863, has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
CHIEF WARRANT OFFICER FREDERICK E. FERGUSON UNITED STATES ARMY
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty:
Chief Warrant Officer Frederick E. Ferguson, United States Army, distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity while serving with. Company C, 227th Aviation Battalion, 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) at Hue, Republic of Vietnam. On 31 January 1968, Chief Warrant Officer Ferguson, commander of a re-supply helicopter, monitoring an emergency call from wounded passengers and crewmen of a downed helicopter under heavy attack within the enemy controlled city of Hue, unhesitatingly volunteered to attempt evacuation. Despite warnings for all aircraft to stay clear of the area due to heavy anti-aircraft fire, Chief Warrant Officer Ferguson began a low-level flight at maximum airspeed along the Perfume River toward the tiny, isolated South Vietnamese Army compound in which the crash survivors had taken refuge. Coolly and skillfully maintaining his course in the face of intense, short range fire from enemy occupied buildings and boats, he displayed superior flying skill and tenacity of purpose by landing his aircraft in an extremely confined area in a blinding dust cloud under heavy mortar and small arms fire. Although the helicopter was severely damaged by mortar fragments during the loading of the wounded, Chief Warrant Officer Ferguson disregarded the damage and, taking off through the continuing hail of mortar fire, he flew his crippled aircraft on the return route through the rain of fire that he had experienced earlier and safely returned his wounded passengers to friendly control. Chief Warrant Officer Ferguson's extraordinary gallantry, determination and intrepidity saved the lives of five of his comrades. His actions are in the highest tradition of the military service and reflect great credit on himself and the United States Army.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress March 3, 1863, has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
SPECIALIST FOUR THOMAS J. KINSMAN UNITED STATES ARMY
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty:
Specialist Four Thomas J. Kinsman (then Private First Class) distinguished himself by gallantry and intrepidity in action on the afternoon of 6 February 1968 while serving as a Rifleman with Company B, 3rd Battalion, 60th Infantry, 9th Infantry Division, on a reconnaissance in force mission near the City of Vinh Long, in the Republic of Vietnam. As his company was proceeding up a narrow canal in armored troop carriers, it came under sudden and intense rocket, automatic weapons and small arms fire from a well entrenched Viet Cong force. The company immediately beached and began assaulting the enemy bunker complex. Hampered by exceedingly dense undergrowth which limited visibility to ten meters, a group of eight men became cut off from the main body of the company. As they were moving through heavy enemy fire to effect a linkup, an enemy soldier in a concealed position hurled a grenade into their midst. Specialist Kinsman immediately alerted his comrades of the danger, then unhesitatingly threw himself on the grenade and blocked the explosion with his body. As a result of his courageous action, he received severe head and chest wounds. Through his indomitable courage, complete disregard for his personal safety and profound concern for his fellow soldiers, Specialist Kinsman averted loss of life and injury to the other seven men of his element. Specialist Kinsman's conspicuous gallantry and extraordinary heroism at the risk of his own life, above and beyond the call of duty, are in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service and reflect great credit upon himself, his unit, and the United States Army.
Note: The President spoke at 10:43 a.m. on the South Lawn at the White House.
A White House release issued on May 16, 1969, announcing the Medal of Honor presentation ceremony is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, P. 703 ).