Richard Nixon
May 19, 1969

Remarks on Presenting Scholastic Achievement Awards to Blind College Students
I HAVE two awards to present today to two of the most outstanding young men in America and, I would say, in the world.
This is the Scholastic Achievement Award from the Recording for the Blind organization, with which many of you are familiar.
It is to James Winford Selby III, in recognition of outstanding academic performance in attaining the degree of bachelor of arts from Tulane University. Congratulations.
I should point out, too, that not only was his performance outstanding; he was first in his class with a 3.8 average. That is a magnificent achievement. You have set a fine standard and example for all of the rest of us.
And the second award, the Scholastic Achievement Award, to David Steven Mischel, in recognition of outstanding academic performance in attaining the degree of bachelor of arts from Trinity College.
Again, an outstanding record in every respect, the 3.8 average, first in his class, with great competition, and again a man that we all admire, not only for that high scholastic achievement, but also for the example that he has set for all the rest of us.

Congratulations.
Now, if I could say a word with regard to the work of the organization, the scholastic Recording for the Blind. This is one of several organizations in this field, but it is one that deserves support of all Americans. Except for the contributions that are made by private citizens, by corporations, and others voluntarily, it would not have been possible to record these books so that these young men--who could not see but who could hear and thereby could understand--it would not have been possible for them to learn and achieve this academic excellence for which they are being rewarded today.
And to all who may be listening to this program, I only say this: that having, many years ago, gone through the experience of competing in college and then in law school for high academic achievement, it is very difficult to get near the top of the class or anywhere near it when you have every ability to read and to see. But to have a boy go clear to the top when he was not able to see, this is certainly a magnificent achievement for that boy, but a wonderful example for all the rest of us. And particularly it makes us all realize that we should, to the extent that we can, give assistance through our contributions to organizations like Recording for the Blind so that they will be able to help others--others who are not as fortunate as we are, but who have the capability to go clear to the top if they just get that little bit of help.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 10:12 a.m. in the Rosevelt Room at the White House. The awards are made annually by Recording for the Blind, Inc., a national nonprofit organization which provides free recorded textbooks for college students.