Richard Nixon
November 14, 1969

Memorandum on Expenditures by Government Departments and Agencies
Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies
I have approved H.J. Res. 966, which provides temporary appropriations to finance governmental programs for which 1970 appropriations have not been enacted as of October 31, 1969.
This legislation is required for continued operation of our government. But I must express my deep concern with the particular terms which would permit some agencies, such as the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, to commit the government to make expenditures at a rate inconsistent with our efforts to keep the budget under strict control and thereby restrain inflation.
I am fully aware of our needs in health, education, training, and other social areas, and have reflected those in my budget proposals as best I can. At the same time, I feel strongly that the soundness and stability of our economy demand stringent fiscal measures on all fronts, and that such stringency will better serve the long-run interests of all the American people.
I take this occasion, therefore, to reconfirm my statement of August 12, 1969, on the action by the House of Representatives that added $1.1 billion .to the appropriations for the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare when I stated "my intention not to spend in this fiscal year any funds appropriated in excess of my budgetary estimates of April this year. No commitments will be made to spend these additional appropriations until the Congress has completed action on all appropriation bills and revenue measures.' '
Any increases in appropriations that permit spending beyond that level must be offset by equivalent reductions, either by the Congress or by the executive branch. Therefore, I direct you to make no commitments at this time which will lead to spending in excess of the 1970 outlay ceiling which the Director of the Bureau of the Budget communicated to you at my direction.
I expect your full cooperation in demonstrating our fiscal responsibility. It is imperative that this Administration do everything in its power to fight the inflationary pressures which are eroding the purchasing power of the American people.
RICHARD NIXON
Note: As enacted, H.J. Res. 966, is Public Law 91-117 (83 Stat. 191 ).