Richard Nixon
November 01, 1970

Remarks About the 1970 Elections.
I WOULD LIKE to talk to you for a moment about one of the most important decisions you will be making in your life, a decision that will affect your future and the future of America: your vote on November 3d. It is customary as we get close to an election to speak of voting Republican or voting Democratic.
But the issues this year are too important to speak in partisan terms.
What we must consider is what is best for America. When I was elected President 2 years ago, I promised that I would work to end the war in Vietnam and win a just peace in the world, that I would work to stop the rise in crime in America, to stop the rise in inflation, and to bring about a period of reform in which we could have progress and prosperity and full employment in America, but without war.
We have made progress in all these fields, but not enough. The President of the United States is a very powerful man, but he can't do the job alone. I need the help of the Congress, more help than I have had. I need your help, your help in electing men to the House and the Senate who will work with the President, rather than against the President, for these great goals.
For example, in Vietnam we have been bringing men home. We have reduced casualties. We have a peace offer on the table. We are ending the war. We are ending it in a way that will discourage aggression and win a just peace.
We need men in the House and the Senate who will support the President in this great objective.
And here at home, in the fight against crime, we need laws, we need judges, and we need men in the House and the Senate who will speak out on this subject and who will vote and speak out, not just at election time but all year round.
In the fight against inflation, we need men who will have the courage to vote against a spending program that might benefit a few people, but that would raise prices for all the people. And we need men who will vote for our historic and very imaginative programs of reform, which will lead to what we all want: that progress and prosperity without war.
There is one final note I would like to leave with you as we approach this election: In recent weeks and in recent months, you have seen on your television screens some of our young people engaging in violence, trying to shout down speakers, and engaging in activities that you disapprove of. And some may get the impression that that is a majority of young America, or that they are the leaders of the future.
Well, I can assure you that I have traveled all over this country, and that violent few are not the majority of young Americans, and they are not going to be the leaders of the future.
I am proud of the great majority of our young Americans today.
They want change, but they believe in peaceful change, as you do.
I finally want to say what you can do to answer those who do engage in violence, who do engage in activities that you disapprove of.
Don't answer in kind. It is time for the great silent majority to stand up and be counted, and the way you can be counted is by voting on November 3d. I urge you to vote for those men who are candidates for the House and the Senate who will support the President, rather than vote against him on these great issues which I have described tonight.
But, however you vote, I can assure you, you have my respect and my very best wishes.
Note: The President's remarks were videotaped on Tuesday, October 27, 1970, for broadcast at the halftime of regionally televised professional football games on Sunday, November 1, 1970, on time purchased by the Republican National Committee.