Richard Nixon
November 25, 1970

Remarks on Presenting Medals to Members of a Search and Rescue Mission to Sontay, Vietnam.
Mr. Secretary of Defense, Admiral Moorer, Members of the Congress, and our very special guests today:
Many very great men have been honored in this room, but I can assure you that no President of the United States could be more proud than I am to pay tribute to the men that we honor today.
Theirs was a mission of mercy, an attempt to rescue some of their fellow Americans who were being held captive in North Vietnam under the most barbaric conditions.
When we think of that mission of mercy, we think of the fact that it was carried out with incomparable efficiency; even more important, it was carried out with incomparable bravery.
As the Secretary of Defense and Admiral Moorer will recall, before I gave the final order, I asked some very searching questions. I found that each man who participated in this mission was a volunteer.
I found that each man who participated in this mission knew before he went that there was a 50 percent chance that the mission might not succeed.
And I found that each man who participated in this mission knew that there was a 50 percent chance that he might lose his life.
After learning these things, I asked Admiral Moorer how it was possible to get men to volunteer for such duty. He said to me, "Sir, we could have had thousands to volunteer to go in to help our prisoners of war."
And so today, we think of the fact that we sometimes hear that the young in America have no heroes. This is the answer: When a man is willing to risk his life to rescue one of his fellow men, that is heroism of the highest order.
What these men have done is a message, a message to the prisoners of war still in North Vietnam, to their wives and their loved ones, some of whom are here, that the prisoners of war have not been forgotten and that we will continue to do everything we can at the diplomatic table and in other ways to attempt to bring them back home.
Also, what these men have done is a very special message to America on Thanksgiving eve. We can all be thankful tonight and tomorrow that America has produced such magnificent men.
The Secretary of Defense will read the citations.
[Secretary of Defense Melvin K. Laird read the following citations: ]
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD OF

THE DISTINGUISHED SERVICE CROSS

TO

ARTHUR D. SIMONS
Colonel Arthur D. Simons, United States Army, distinguished himself by extraordinary heroism while commanding the ground element of a Joint United States Task Force on an operation deep in North Vietnam on 21 November 1970. With complete disregard for his own personal safety, Colonel Simons voluntarily participated as a member of a Joint Task Force with the humanitarian mission of rescuing United States military personnel held as prisoners of war at the Son Tay Prison Compound approximately twenty nautical miles from Hanoi, the capital of North Vietnam. In an outstanding display of leadership and personal courage, Colonel Simons led the helo-borne force in the rescue effort. On the ground, the search and rescue element was immediately taken under automatic weapons fire by the enemy. While directing and supervising the operation, Colonel Simons continually exposed himself to enemy fire, and on one occasion, personally took under fire enemy personnel in close proximity to his position. The success of the operation was the direct result of Colonel Simons' calm and competent leadership in an extremely hazardous situation. His professional conduct instilled confidence in his men and resulted in an outstanding operation. Colonel Simons' extraordinary heroism was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Army and reflects great credit upon himself and the United States Army.
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD OF

THE DISTINGUISHED SERVICE CROSS

TO

TYRONE J. ADDERLY
Sergeant First Class Tyrone J. Adderly, United States Army, distinguished himself by extraordinary heroism and risk of life on 21 November 1970 while serving voluntarily as a member of a Joint United States Task Force with the mission of rescuing American military personnel held as prisoners of war at Son Tay, North Vietnam. While participating in the operation, Sergeant Adderly, a gunner and ground guide for one of the command elements, came under heavy automatic weapons fire as the element approached the enemy complex. With complete disregard for his own life, Sergeant Adderly advanced against the hostile position and neutralized the enemy with highly accurate M-79 grenade fire. As the force moved into the complex, Sergeant Adderly once again came under heavy automatic weapons fire. Unhesitatingly, he assaulted the enemy position and eliminated the threat to the force. His valorous actions contributed greatly to the successful conduct of the assigned mission without the loss of a single American life. Sergeant First Class Adderly's extraordinary heroism was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Army and reflects great credit upon himself and the United States Army.
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD OF THE AIR FORCE CROSS

TO

LE ROY M. WRIGHT
Technical Sergeant LeRoy M. Wright, United States Air Force, displayed extraordinary heroism while serving as a helicopter crew member of a Joint United States Task Force which conducted a rescue operation against the Son Tay Prisoner of War Camp in North Vietnam on 21 November 1970. Although suffering injury to his left foot and ankle during the landing in the prison compound, Sergeant Wright remained with the helicopter until all passengers and crew had exited the aircraft despite the possibility of aircraft explosion. Sergeant Wright then vigorously moved to an exposed area and, with complete disregard for his own life, placed extremely effective covering fire on enemy positions which endangered the operation thus freeing the Army element within the compound to continue its mission. Sergeant Wright then, despite the intense pain of his injury, courageously moved by himself more than 200 meters with the Army element to the extraction landing zone. These actions reflect great credit upon Sergeant Wright and the United States Air Force.
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD OF

THE DISTINGUISHED SERVICE MEDAL

TO

LE ROY J. MANOR
Brigadier General LeRoy J. Manor, United States Air Force, distinguished himself by exceptionally meritorious service to the United States in a duty of great responsibility while serving as the Commander of a Joint United States Task Force on 21 November 1970. General Manor commanded the humanitarian force whose mission was to search for and rescue United States military personnel held as prisoners of war deep within the territory. of North Vietnam. He conceived a brilliant tactical plan, carefully selected and helped train the volunteers with the necessary expertise to carry it out. Over a period of three months, he repeatedly simulated each phase of the operation, thereby insuring its faultless execution. General Manor's brilliant talents of command and supervision resulted in a superbly trained joint task force. The mission was daring in concept and bold in execution. General Manor directed the operation from his command post with the highest degree of professionalism. Despite great hazard, the operation was conducted without the loss of a single American life. The singular efforts and outstanding achievement of General Manor are in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Air Force and reflect great credit upon himself and the United States Air Force.
[The President then resumed speaking.]
Ladies and gentlemen, that concludes the ceremony.
And I am sure that some of you would perhaps like personally to congratulate the men who have received these awards, and to meet some of our other special guests, the wives of some of the prisoners of war who are here as our special guests and, of course, the wives of those who have received the awards. They would all, I know, be very happy to meet you.
We thank you for coming, and we're very happy you could be with us on a day that we think is a very proud one for the United States of America.
Note: The President spoke at 4: 05 p.m. in the State Dining Room at the White House.
Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, USN, was Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.