Richard Nixon
October 17, 1970

Statement in Support of Republican Candidates in Pennsylvania.
I HAVE COME to Pennsylvania to voice my support for the reelection of Senator Hugh Scott and the election of Ray Broderick as Governor.
Lieutenant Governor Broderick is a man superbly qualified for one of the most far-reaching executive jobs in the Nation. As president of the Constitutional Convention, he demonstrated his capacity to lead: Thanks to his ability to work together with both Democrats and Republicans, Pennsylvania's constitution was rewritten for the first time in 94 years.
As Governor, Ray Broderick will build on the foundation of fiscal responsibility that is the hallmark of the administration in which he has played an important role. He will resist the kind of big spending that leads to heavy taxation. I endorse his candidacy wholeheartedly; he will make a great Governor, one who will work with this administration to revenue sharing and welfare reform working realities.
Senator Hugh Scott is a man who has my complete confidence and who has earned the confidence of the voters of Pennsylvania. He is a man of deep convictions, who has the courage of those convictions; at the same time, he is a team player, one who knows how to get progressive legislation moving through the process of government.
Hugh Scott carries not only the title of Minority Leader, but he carries the quality of leadership with him in all he does. I have worked closely with him on matters of the highest national importance; I trust him; I know you can trust him to act in the best interests of this Nation at home and abroad, and--as his successful effort in regard to the 1976 Bicentennial shows--you can be sure he will fight for the best interests of the State of Pennsylvania.
The Republicans' candidates for Congress, for statewide office, and for the legislature are all part of a team; never before has it been so important to elect men who will work together to build a better State and a better Nation.
Note: The statement was released at Lancaster, Pa.