Richard Nixon
October 20, 1970

Statement in Support of the Republican Candidate for the United States Senate in Indiana.
THE HOOSIER State has sometimes been called "The Valley of Democracy," for this is the place where the voice of the people has always been heard loud and clear. Indiana spoke loud and clear in 1968 when it gave the Nixon-Agnew ticket the largest margin of victory of any State in the Union. The Nation got the message in 1968, and the Nation will get the message again in 1970 when you follow up on your support for Nixon and Agnew by electing Richard Roudebush to the Senate of the United States.
I was honored to learn that one of the slogans of the Roudebush campaign has been "Give Nixon a Chance." Certainly one key element in my message to the voters of Indiana is this: "Give Roudebnsh a Chance"--a chance to demonstrate in the Senate of the United States the same strong commitment to the free enterprise system and the American way of life that he has displayed in the House of Representatives.
When Richard Roudebush sits in the United States Senate, Indiana will be represented there by a man who is truly a member of the Nixon team, a man who will work with us and not against us, a man who will help us to break the legislative logjam and move forward with a strong Republican program. The Roudebush position closely parallels the Nixon position on the key issues of our time-issues such as national defense, government spending, and aid to the elderly.
I speak with confidence about Richard Roudebush because he has worked closely with my administration in the past. We have consulted with him on a wide variety of matters. I even remember one time when he came all the way to San Clemente to discuss veterans hospitals. As a past commander of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, his words on veterans affairs always carry special weight, and I am proud to say that veterans programs are one area to which the Nixon administration has given special attention.
Indiana is a State which has produced many great Republican leaders over the years. I hope it will continue that record by producing a Roudebush victory on November 3d.
Note: The statement was released at Fort Wayne, Ind.