Richard Nixon
October 20, 1970

Statement in Support of Republican Candidates in North Carolina.
THE REPUBLICAN Party of North Carolina has nominated an outstanding group of congressional candidates in 1970. Four of them are incumbents, six are challengers. I consider all of them to be outstanding members of the Nixon team and I hope the voters of North Carolina will give them strong support on November 3d.
In the last 2 years I have done everything in my power to carry out the campaign promises I made in 1968. Many of those promises have turned into realities but others have been stalled by an uncooperative Congress. If the Nixon program of reform, restoration, and renewal is to move forward in the next 2 years, I will need the support of more Congressmen who are full-time members of the Nixon team.
The Republican candidates for Congress in North Carolina are ready to play that role. They share my views on the great issues of our time--on foreign policy, on spending policies, on the critical issue of law and order. On issues which are of particular importance to North Carolinians, issues such as the busing of schoolchildren and the future of the textile industry, these candidates and the administration in Washington also share common Views.
We do not believe the constitutional mandate that schools be desegregated requires compulsory busing for the sole purpose of achieving an arbitrary racial balance. We oppose such compulsory busing, and we favor the neighborhood school concept. As far as textiles are concerned, our policy is designed to bring relief to that industry and its employees in a way that does not damage their livelihood. We want to provide an orderly flow of textile imports into the country without at the same time adversely affecting farm exports.
I hope that on November 3d the voters of North Carolina will see to it that four distinguished public servants who have made fine reputations in Washington will be returned to the Congress: Wilmer D. Mizell, Earl B. Ruth, Charles Raper Jonas, and James T. Broyhill. And I hope they will be joined in the 92d Congress by R. Frank Everett, Herbert Howell, R. Jack Hawke, Clifton B. Barham, Jr., Frederick R. Weber, and Luke Atkinson. The success of the Noah Carolina COP in the space of a few years has impressed the entire Nation. I hope and trust that progress will continue.
Note: The statement was released at N.C.