Richard Nixon
October 19, 1970

Statement in Support of the Republican Candidate for the United States Senate in North Dakota.
IN EACH of the four elections in which I have been on the national ticket, North Dakota has been one of the top States for the Republican Party. It is my hope that history will repeat itself in 1970 and that North Dakota will prove that it is once again a top Republican State by electing Tom Kleppe to the United States Senate.
North Dakota is a strong agricultural State and it is appropriate that it has produced in Tom Kleppe one of the leading experts in Congress on the problems of the farmer. As an enterprising member of the Agriculture Committee in the House of Representatives, Tom Kleppe has earned an outstanding reputation as an informed and articulate defender of the farmers' interests. He deserves much of the credit, for example, for the maintenance of 100 percent of parity on domestic wheat. Tom Kleppe stood with the administration when we asked the Congress for "action now" on the farm bill this autumn. Unfortunately, the answer we got back from the Democratic Congress was "wait later."
Tom Kleppe is also a strong administration supporter on other issues. His voting record shows that again and again he has said "No" to the congressional "Big Spenders." In the area of foreign policy, Tom Kleppe has consistently supported the administration's strategy to end the war and win the peace in Vietnam and around the world.
When Tom Kleppe is elected to the United States Senate, North Dakota will be represented there by two great Republican leaders, Tom Kleppe and Milton Young. The voters of North Dakota should keep in mind the fact that if enough Republicans are elected to the Senate this fall, Milton Young will become chairman of one of the most important committees in the Senate--one that vitally affects the people of North Dakota and of every other State--the Appropriations Committee. Therefore, a vote for Tom Kleppe for United States Senator is also a vote for Milton Young as chairman of the Appropriations Committee.
If the Nation is to meet the challenges of the 1970's, then government must function as effectively as possible at every level--from the town hall and county courthouse all the way to the national Government in Washington. The voters of North Dakota can do much to enhance the effectiveness of national Government by electing to the Senate of the United States another strong member of the Nixon team, Tom Kleppe.
Note: The statement was released at Grand Forks, N. Dak.