Richard Nixon
October 15, 1970

Statement Announcing the Jobs for Veterans Program
THIS YEAR over one million servicemen and women will complete their military service in the Armed Forces and return to civilian life. Almost four million Vietnam era veterans have already returned to civilian life. These servicemen and women deserve every opportunity that a grateful nation can provide. For this reason I am announcing the Jobs for Veterans Program, and appointing Mr. James F. Oates, Jr., as National Chairman for this effort. Mr. Oates will be assisted by an Advisory Committee of 100 composed of business, labor, government, and civic leaders. This Committee will be jointly appointed by the participating agencies and announced at a later date.
Jobs for Veterans is a nationwide effort to highlight the quality of the American veteran whose blend of skills and self-discipline make him an ideal candidate for employment. He has proved himself in the military--all he needs is the opportunity to demonstrate that he can contribute as much in civilian employment. I want this program to increase the national awareness of the veteran's potential as an employee, and I am confident that public and private employers will meet the challenge by providing veterans with widened job and training opportunities.
I have instructed the Departments of Labor, Commerce, and Defense, the Veterans Administration, and other agencies of the executive branch to support the program fully within their areas of responsibility.
Today I call upon American business, organized labor, veterans organizations, and State and local governments to lend their support. The Nation must make full use of the talents and ambitions of these fine young people.
Note: On the same day, the White House released an announcement of Mr. Oates' appointment, which is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 6, p. 1377), and the transcript of a news briefing on the program by Mr. Oates and Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard.