Richard Nixon
October 28, 1969

Remarks at Roanoke, Virginia.
I WOULD just like to take a moment of your time to thank you all for giving me such a wonderful welcome on my return to Virginia and to Roanoke.
I well recall that my first speech in Virginia in a campaign was in 1952. It was in Roanoke. Some of you here are old enough to remember that, I am sure.
I recall out there in the football field that day that Dick Poff [Representative Richard H. Poff of Virginia] said it was the biggest crowd you have ever had in Roanoke or in Virginia; isn't that right?
REPRESENTATIVE POFF. It Was the largest crowd before or since assembled for a political gathering, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT. I was going to say that I understood that the rally was going to be downtown. I don't know how anybody could be there when you are all out here.
But I do want you to know that coming back to this State and to this city and to this part of this State is a very heartwarming thing for me. I only wish that my wife could be here with me. She was with me on all the previous occasions, but for the last 2 days she has been down in bed with the flu bug. But she sends her very best and knows that the "Ladies for Lin" are going to come through for Holton.
Finally, as I will say a little later at the rally downtown, generally a President does not find it possible to go into all of the contests and all of the campaigns that he would like to. This is the first time that I have made an appearance since becoming President of the United States in behalf of a candidate. And I am proud that it is in behalf of Lin Holton, proud because he is my friend, proud because, of course, he happens to be a member of my party, but proud also because he is one of those new, young leaders of this country who will make all Virginians proud of him. I look forward to working with him when he is Governor of this State. Thank you very much for sending him there.
Note: The President spoke at 7:48 p.m. at Woodrum Airport, Roanoke, Va.