Richard Nixon
October 20, 1970

Statement in Support of Republican Candidates in Tennessee.
IN BILL BROCK for the Senate and Winfield Dunn for Governor, Tennessee has produced candidates in the finest tradition of the Volunteer State. I count it a high privilege to be able to give them my strong endorsement.
Bill Brock is a man of Tennessee and a man of the 1970's--and what he stands for is what Tennessee in the 1970's stands for. He stands for law enforcement. He stands for fiscal responsibility. He stands for local control of the schools and better education in the schools. He stands for progress with order, and for peace with honor.
Bill Brock knows that the path of weakness is not the road to peace. In our efforts to achieve a sound and lasting peace not only in Asia but in the world, we need more voices like his in the Senate.
Bill Brock has worked hard and effectively in the battle against crime and drugs, and has given strong support to the anticrime legislation we have been trying to get through Congress.
With a background of service on the important Banking and Currency Committee in the House of Representatives, Bill Brock understands that we can keep a dollar worth a dollar only if we keep a lid on irresponsible spending. Because of this, he has had the courage to stand up against the "Big Spenders" in Congress-and we need that courage in the Senate.
I know Bill Brock. I trust Bill Brock. The Senate needs Bill Brock. And the people of Tennessee can be proud to be served by Bill Brock.
Winfield Dunn is a dynamic, hardworking leader who will bring integrity, sound judgment, and efficiency to the Governor's office. He will speak for all the people of Tennessee. He will bring fresh new ideas to Nashville, along with the vigor and the competence to translate these into sensible and workable programs.
I often have spoken of the need to get power and responsibility flowing back from Washington to the States and to the people. This requires having men of the character and ability of Winfield Dunn in the Governors' offices--and I look forward to working with Winfield Dunn in making the years ahead better ones for Tennessee and for the Nation.
A vote for Bill Brock and Winfield Dunn will be a vote for a bright new chapter in the proud history of Tennessee.
Note: The statement was released at Johnson City, Tenn.