Richard Nixon
October 30, 1971

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Tito of Yugoslavia.
AT THE invitation of the President of the United States of America, Richard Nixon, the President of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Josip Broz Tito, accompanied by Mrs. Broz and their party, is paying a State visit to the United States. Following their Washington stay from October 28 to October 30, 1971, President Tito and Mrs. Broz and their party are to visit several points of interest in other parts of the country, remaining in the United States until November 2, 1971.

The meetings between the two Presidents, which took place in a cordial, frank and friendly atmosphere, provided the opportunity for comprehensive discussion of the principal issues on the current international scene. Full and mutual respect was accorded the views expressed by both sides in the talks, which covered areas of agreement and areas where differences existed. Each side presented its full and candid views on a broad range of topics which included, in addition to Yugoslav-US relations, European security, the Middle East, South and Southeast Asia, Africa, the developing countries, the international monetary situation, and others. In the course of the visit, problems of environment and international measures for the control of illicit narcotics traffic were also discussed.
The two Presidents devoted particular attention to the importance of guaranteeing peace and stability by the peaceful settlement of disputes and by adherence to the principles of independence, mutual respect and the full equality of sovereign states, regardless of divergence or similarity in their social, political and economic systems, in full accordance with the spirit and principles of the United Nations Charter.
They welcomed the continuing growth of cooperation throughout the world and increased reliance on participation in negotiations to reconcile the interests of all nations, large and small, in a world of indivisible peace and interdependence.
It was emphasized in this regard that Yugoslavia's policy of nonalignment has been a significant factor in international relations. Countries following such a policy, together with the rest of the world, can make an active contribution to the resolution of world problems and to the more favorable evolution of international relations.
Presidents Tito and Nixon stressed that meaningful disarmament and arms control measures, as well as productive economic and social development, are inter-related factors of peace, stability, and progress in the world. The two Presidents reviewed the problems and needs of the developing countries and the efforts these countries are making in order to improve their position, as well as the possibilities and interest of the international community to assist them in this, particularly in view of the present economic and monetary situation in the world.
Presidents Tito and Nixon agreed that, since their last meeting, measurable progress has been made in the search for lasting peace and security in Europe. They believe that it is possible to take further significant steps along those lines which would serve the interests not only of the countries of Europe and the Mediterranean basin, but of world peace generally. They expressed their strong view that a firm peace and true security are indivisible and can be attained only in Europe as a whole, and not in only one or another part of it. They are convinced that each of the European and other interested states has an indispensable role in the construction of a Europe in which reconciliation, peace, and security are fully assured to all its peoples.
Both sides expressed the belief that general improvement in the international atmosphere and the broadening of the area of negotiations and cooperation must be supported by urgent efforts to achieve peaceful settlements of the more critical and dangerous conflicts, particularly those in the Middle East and South Asia. Each side stated its view on Southeast Asia.
President Tito conveyed to President Nixon his impressions from his recent meetings with the leaders of various countries. He acquainted President Nixon with the activities of Yugoslavia in the international field, and also with certain domestic questions concerning the Constitutional amendments and the economic development of the country. President Nixon reaffirmed the interest of the United States in the independence and nonaligned position and policy of Yugoslavia.

President Nixon advised President Tito of the current initiatives of the United States Government in international relations, of his contacts with world statesmen and of the new economic policy of the United States. President Tito expressed his great interest in the foreign policy initiatives of the United States Government and in its important role in international affairs.
Presidents Tito and Nixon expressed satisfaction with the development of Yugoslav-US bilateral relations in all fields in the year since their last meeting. Noting that consultations between the two countries had broadened significantly at all levels on matters of mutual interest, the two Presidents reaffirmed their conviction that extensive bilateral exchange on all topics has served the interests of the two countries and of world peace, and resolved that these consultations should be continued and further extended.
The two Presidents also agreed that in the further development of cooperation in fields of common interest, particular attention should be paid to the more advanced forms of economic relations including industrial cooperation, joint investment, cooperation on third markets, etc., to new, broader joint programs in scientific and technological research; and to working out a long-term program of cultural and artistic exchange.
They expressed the conviction that relations between the US and Yugoslavia, characterized by equality and complete mutual respect, represent an important factor for the peace and stability of Europe and the world in general, and serve the alms of broad international understanding. Guided by these goals, and in the interests of the further development of friendly relations between the two countries, the two Presidents resolved to continue the useful practice of the exchange of mutual contacts.
The two sides will base their cooperation and relations on lasting foundations in accordance with the understanding achieved and in the spirit of the principles reflected in this joint statement.