Richard Nixon
October 27, 1970

Statement in Support of Republican Candidates in Florida.
THERE IS one question which all the voters of Florida should ask as they vote for Senator on November 3d: "Who will be the most effective Senator for Florida during the next 6 years?"
I believe that the clear answer to that question is "Bill Cramer."
When Bill Cramer went to Washington in 1955, he was the first Republican that Florida had elected to the Congress since 1875. He quickly proved that he knew how to get things done in Washington, and he has become an important member of the Republican leadership team in the House of Representatives. As a member of that team, he has been meeting with me on a regular basis ever since I took office. I am confident he will also be a highly effective leader in the United States Senate.
One of the areas in which Bill Cramer's leadership has been most notable is the fight against crime and disorder. The author of significant legislation designed to stop bombing and riots, he deserves the support of every voter who looks upon law and order as a critical issue of our time. He has been a strong force in the fight to give a better break to our senior citizens. He has been a strong force in the effort to save the environment. And he also shares the administration's position opposing the compulsory busing of schoolchildren for the sole purpose of achieving a federally-imposed racial balance in our classrooms.
I also take this opportunity to express my support for Governor Claude Kirk-the first Republican Governor of Florida since Reconstruction--as he bids for reelection. As one who has long been a frequent visitor to this State, I know that I can depend on the Republican candidates here to support the Nixon administration on the great issues of our time. I urge the voters of Florida to support the administration by casting their ballots for Bill Cramer and Claude Kirk and the entire Republican ticket.
Note: The statement was released at Key Biscayne, Fla.