Richard Nixon
September 26, 1970

Proclamation 4014—Veterans Day, 1970

Veterans Day, 1970, is an appropriate time for all Americans to reflect again on the meaning—and the price—of peace and freedom. For this is a time when we pause to honor those Americans who have been willing to risk life itself in the service of these ideals—from Valley Forge to Vietnam.
On an occasion like this, we feel the common bond which unites the American people across the centuries. We are reminded again that millions of Americans through the years have felt so deeply about our national ideals that they have been willing to set aside plans and hopes and friends and family to serve in the Armed Forces of the nation. We are proud to know that the spirit of sacrifice and service continues to characterize our country.
On this Veterans Day our thoughts are especially with those who have returned from the war in Vietnam and those who are still a part of it, with those who are held as prisoners and those who lie in hospitals, with those who are missing in action and those who died in combat. All of these men and women have proved themselves worthy inheritors of the great traditions which veterans of other wars established and maintained. Though much has changed in our country through the decades, the selfless devotion of our fighting men has not changed.
It is important that all of our servicemen and all of our nearly 28 million living veterans understand that there is something else which has not changed in this country: the gratitude and respect which the American people feel for them. These feelings are expressed in many ways—formal and informal, tangible and intangible. They find very concrete expression in the work of the Veterans Administration, which is celebrating its 40th anniversary this year. Yet another way in which the nation acknowledges its debt to our veterans is its annual observance on November 11 of Veterans Day, a legal holiday designated by the Congress and dedicated to the cause of world peace (Act of May 13, 1938, 52 Stat. 351 as amended [5 U.S.C. 6103]).
Now, Therefore, I, Richard Nixon,President of the United States of America, call upon the people of this nation to join in commemorating, with suitable observances, Wednesday, November 11, 1970, as Veterans Day.
As a mark of further respect for the veterans of this nation, I direct the appropriate officials of the government to arrange for the display of the flag of the United States on all public buildings on that day; and I request all government officials to cooperate with civic and patriotic organizations in conducting appropriate public ceremonies throughout the land.
It is my hope that on this day all Americans will offer special prayers for peace and for the safety of those who now serve in our Armed Forces. And let us all in silent tribute pay special honor to those who have paid the full price to keep our freedom alive.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand this twenty-sixth day of September, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred seventy, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred ninety-fifth.


RICHARD NIXON