Richard Nixon
September 23, 1970

Message to the Senate Transmitting the Convention Terminating the Nicaraguan Canal Treaty of 1914.
To the Senate of the United States:
With a view to receiving the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification, I transmit herewith the convention signed at Managua on July 14, 1970, between the United States of America and the Republic of Nicaragua for the termination of the convention respecting a Nicaraguan canal route signed at Washington on August 5, 1914.
For the information of the Senate, I transmit also the report of the Secretary of State with respect to the recently signed convention.
Agreement to terminate the 1914 convention, popularly known as the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty, which entered into force on June 22, 1916, was reached after the two Governments had decided, following extensive consultations, that in light of changed circumstances and present-day needs it was time to reexamine the 54-year-old convention. The Government of Nicaragua wanted to proceed with plans for developing the San Juan River Basin, the prospective site for an interoceanic canal through Nicaragua. For its part, the United States Government, which had not exercised any of its rights under the 1914 convention, had concluded it was unlikely to do so in the future, particularly in view of the relatively high cost of constructing a canal on the Nicaragua route.
Termination of the 1914 convention is a positive, effective, and essential step in continuing the excellent relations that have existed between the two countries.
It is provided in the new convention that, upon its entry into force, the 1914 convention shall terminate, with the consequence that all the rights and options accorded by the 1914 convention to the United States Government shall cease to have effect. Such rights and options include "the exclusive proprietary rights" in regard to the construction, operation and maintenance of a canal across Nicaraguan territory; leases to Great Corn Island and Little Corn Island; and the option to establish and maintain a United States naval base on Nicaraguan territory on the shores of the Gulf of Fonseca. The United States has, as previously noted, never exercised any of the rights or options granted by the 1914 convention.
I recommend that the Senate give early and favorable consideration to the convention terminating the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

September 23, 1970
Note: The text of the convention and the report of the Secretary of State are printed in Senate Executive L (91st Cong., 2d sess.).