Richard Nixon
September 17, 1969

Statement Announcing the Membership of the Advisory Council for Minority Enterprise
IT IS with great pleasure that I announce today the names of 63 distinguished leaders from a broad spectrum of American life who have volunteered to serve on the new Advisory Council for Minority Enterprise. I am grateful to these dedicated citizens who have recognized the importance of involving more members of minority groups in the American enterprise system.
Encouraging more successful enterprise by minority group members is a vital objective of this administration. We believe that every American should have the opportunity to share in the profits of our free enterprise system. With each new business that comes into being we enlarge the opportunities for more new careers. Thus the success that our minority people have in owning and managing their own businesses will provide a twofold value for them and for the Nation.
Six months ago, I pointed out in creating the Office of Minority Business Enterprise that this effort is neither a panacea nor a substitute for other efforts to create more and better job opportunities for all Americans. We want to create new opportunity and foster the pride of accomplishment in both the management and the work force of the Nation.
We firmly intend that this long term effort shall succeed. As the appointment of this committee today indicates we are bringing together some of the best minds in America to eliminate roadblocks on the path of economic opportunity for every citizen of our country.
Both Secretary Stans and I look to this distinguished group for proposal of feasible methods to speed the flow of capital, ease credit facilities, obtain insurance and provide needed technical assistance, and thereby help eliminate many of the frustrations which have blocked so many minority Americans in their efforts to become a constructive part of our national economic life.
Through its collective experience, its wide knowledge of business and industry, and its understanding of the challenge confronting our minorities, this Council will broaden the base of opportunity by seeking out, recommending, and developing new types of business for minority involvement. It will provide the guidance which will help the Office of Minority Business Enterprise to execute those functions for which it was created.
Two outstanding Americans have agreed to serve as Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Council.
Sam E. Wyly of Dallas, Texas, will be the Chairman. As chairman of the board of the Sam Wyly Foundation of Dallas, he has done much to aid the disadvantaged and contribute to minority economic development.
To work with him as Vice Chairman, I have named Berkeley G. Burrell, president of the National Business League, Washington, D.C. Mr. Burrell already has made a record as a successful pioneer in the promoting of businesses owned and operated by minority group members.
I am confident that the Council will assist this administration in making yesterday's dream today's specific effort and tomorrow's fact. There is no greater bridge to human dignity than the pride that comes with well-earned success in the free enterprise system.
Note: A list of the Council's members with brief biographies of each is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, P. 1271 ).