Richard Nixon
September 23, 1970

Message to the Senate Transmitting the United States-Mexican Treaty on Archaeological, Historical, and Cultural Properties.
To the Senate of the United States:
I am pleased to transmit to the Senate, for your advice and consent to ratification, the Treaty of Cooperation between the United States and Mexico providing for the recovery and return of stolen archaeological, historical and cultural properties, signed at Mexico City on July 17, 1970.
In recent years the despoliation of archaeological sites in Mexico and thefts of art objects from churches and collections has reached serious proportions. The illicit export of national art treasures to art markets here and in Europe has become a matter of serious concern to the Government of Mexico. In 1967, when President Diaz Ordaz of Mexico visited the United States, it was agreed to explore possible methods of controlling the unauthorized movement between the United States and Mexico of articles of archaeological significance and historical value.
The Treaty which has now been signed would provide for cooperation in law enforcement measures aimed at halting the depredation of historic sites and facilitating the recovery of stolen cultural properties. It would commit the United States and Mexico to employ the legal means at their disposal to recover and return to the country of ownership historical, cultural and archaeological properties of outstanding importance to their national patrimony which have been stolen and removed from one country to the other. In addition, the two governments would establish a framework to strengthen communication between scientists and scholars in the two countries and to encourage archaeological research by scholars of both countries. The Treaty further contemplates the circulation and exhibit in each country of archaeological and historical properties from the other and a legitimate commerce in art objects.
The Treaty with Mexico should provide a strong deterrent to the illegal export of stolen cultural properties as well as promote mutual understanding and appreciation of the artistic and cultural heritage of our two countries.
I recommend that the Senate give early and favorable consideration to this law enforcement treaty.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

September 23, 1970
Note: The text of the treaty and the report of the Secretary of State are printed in Senate Executive K (91st Cong., 2d sess.).