Richard Nixon
September 17, 1970

Remarks at a Citizenship Day Reception in Chicago, Illinois.
Senator Smith, and Judge Robson, ladies and gentlemen:
This is a very special honor for me in my capacity as President of the United States and also, as an American citizen, to welcome you prior to the time that you will be sworn in tonight as citizens of the United States of America by Judge Robson.1
1Judge Edwin A. Robson, Chief Judge, United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois.
As I see this group and as I speak to you, I would like to tell you how I, as one who was born an American citizen, feel about you who chose to become American citizens.
My feelings go back over many years. I remember when I was very young. On one occasion, I was studying in history about the various people who had rounded this country. And I know, of course, and knew then, that there were some who could claim that. their ancestors came over on the Mayflower. I went home that day and asked my father, I said, "Dad, what about our ancestors? Did ours come over on the Mayflower or what is the background?" He looked at me a minute, and he said, "I will tell you what you are and what we are. We are Heinz, 57 varieties."
Now what he really meant to say was that is what America is all about.
One of the reasons this is a great country is that we have drawn to America, over the years, people from all the nations of the world, all the continents, all the races. We have a very diverse country, and we have a very interesting country and, therefore, a very strong country. We are very privileged that people who were not born in America, who are not Americans by the accident of birth, but people like yourselves who are Americans by choice, from other countries, have come to this land.
I want you to know, too, that we believe, as we look at the history of America, that those who have come to this land have contributed enormously to the greatness that we know today in this Nation.
I was talking to Mr. Herbert Hoover at the time of the Hungarian refugees, when they were coming out of Hungary in 1956 about Christmas time by the tens of thousands. The question arose in this country, in some circles, as to whether the United States really could absorb that many refugees. President Hoover spoke very bluntly on that point and very directly. He said, "Why, of course we can. I have studied American history. Every new influx of refugees or immigrants from abroad has strengthened America."
You can look back over the years. The Irish, the Poles, the Italians, the Chinese, and the Japanese--those of us who five on the West Coast know of their contribution-people from all the continents, Latin America, Africa, have come to the United States, and each time they have come they have strengthened us. Most recently, for example, we have had the situation of Cuban refugees. And anyone who has visited Florida will tell you that those tens of thousands of Cuban refugees have enormously contributed to the economy of this State, one of the fastest growing in our Nation and one of the most productive States in our Nation.
I also want you to know that as you become American citizens--and I know that you have been living here for some time before you take this step, so you know something about this Nation, and perhaps more about its history if you were to take an examination than if I were to take one right today, because you have done it more recently--I want you to know that we are very proud that this is the land of opportunity.
I was just running over the list of people who have been in the history of this country--recent history--very big men in the Nation, and who came from other lands. One of the great industrialists and one of the greatest inventive geniuses of our times--creative men--is David Sarnoff. He was born in Russia. He came to the United States from Russia.
One of the great' men in sports--we think as the football season begins of those that go back over the years, and perhaps the most legendary name in the sports field was Knute Rockne who came from Norway. Vince Lombardi, who died tragically just a few days ago--his parents came from Italy.
I was thinking even in the field of entertainment Bob Hope, he came from Great Britain. He was born there.
Samuel Gompers, the labor leader, really the founder of the labor movement in the United States as we know it today, was not born here. He came from England.
I was thinking of our own administration, names that you see in the papers all the day. Let me tell you about some of them. Arthur Burns, the head of the Federal Reserve Board. As Senator [Ralph T.] Smith will tell you, and as Judge Robson will also agree, that is the most powerful financial institution in this Nation. It affects the whole economy of the Nation. Who is the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board? Dr. Arthur Burns. Well, he came to the United States from Austria.
Dr. Henry Kissinger, who is my top adviser for the White House in the field of international affairs, came from Germany.
Dr. Houthakker,2who is one of the three men, the top economic advisers of this Government, was born in Holland.
2Dr. Hendrik S. Houthakker, member, Council of Economic Advisers.
So there you see it. That is America. All the nations of the world, all the continents of the world--this is our strength. That is the reason why we are so proud that 140 people are going to join the ranks of America. You are going to add to our strength. We are very proud to have you join us and we certainly want you to know that once you become American citizens there are no differences of degree among Americans.
Whether you are born here or born someplace else, if you are an American citizen you are an American citizen entitled to all of the protections, all the duties as well as the responsibilities. But also, you have all the opportunities and all of the respect that an American citizen deserves and should have.
That is why, for example, where the recent hijacking was concerned, that you have been reading about, that we do not accept the proposition that some American citizens shall be treated one way and some will be treated another way, because they happen to have been born in another country.
Once they become American citizens, they are entitled to the protection of the American Government and they will have it every place in the world.
Now, at this point, if it will be appropriate, I would like to welcome each of you officially as those who will be citizens, as I understand, tonight in the ceremony.
I thought also that you might like to meet Mrs. Nixon. I see we have ladies represented here, too. We are glad that there is no discrimination against women as far as our citizens are concerned. Join the Women's Lib, if you want. But remember, there is no discrimination, not in this house which, at the moment, is the White House, because the White House goes wherever the President is.
Mrs. Nixon would like the honor of presenting to each of you a small American flag, such as the one I am wearing, which you might want to wear on occasions in the future. And I am sure, too, you would like to shake hands with Senator Smith, who is here. Senator Percy was going to be here, but was unable to arrange his schedule for this particular hour. But I know you will all hear from him, too. Of course, Judge Robson will be here to greet you prior to the time that he gives you the allegiance oath tonight.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 12:08 p.m. in the Crystal Ballroom of the Sheraton Blackstone Hotel, Chicago, Ill.