Joseph R. Biden
August 28, 2021

Statement on the United States Evacuation Mission in Kabul, Afghanistan
This morning I met with my national security team in Washington and my commanders in the field. We discussed the strike that U.S. forces took last night against the terrorist group ISIS-K in Afghanistan. I said we would go after the group responsible for the attack on our troops and innocent civilians in Kabul, and we have. This strike was not the last. We will continue to hunt down any person involved in that heinous attack and make them pay. Whenever anyone seeks to harm the United States or attack our troops, we will respond. That will never be in doubt. I thanked General McKenzie for his leadership of that mission, and for his commitment to the safety of our troops in Afghanistan.
The situation on the ground continues to be extremely dangerous, and the threat of terrorist attacks on the airport remains high. Our commanders informed me that an attack is highly likely in the next 24-36 hours. I directed them to take every possible measure to prioritize force protection and ensured that they have all the authorities, resources and plans to protect our men and women on the ground. They assured me that they did, and that they could take these measures while completing the mission and safely retrograding our personnel.
Despite the treacherous situation in Kabul, we are continuing to evacuate civilians. Yesterday we brought out another 6,800 people, including hundreds of Americans. And today we discussed the ongoing preparations to help people continue to leave Afghanistan after our military departs.
The 13 servicemembers that we lost were heroes who made the ultimate sacrifice in service of our highest American ideals and while saving the lives of others. Their bravery and selflessness has enabled more than 117,000 people at risk to reach safety thus far. May God protect our troops and all those standing watch in these dangerous days.
NOTE: The statement referred to Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie, USMC, commander, U.S. Central Command and U.S. Forces Afghanistan; and Lance Cpl. David L. Espinoza, USMC, Sgt. Nicole L. Gee, USMC, Staff Sgt. Darin T. Hoover, USMC, Staff Sgt. Ryan C. Knauss, USA, Corps Cpl. Hunter Lopez, USMC, Lance Cpl. Rylee J. McCollum, USMC, Lance Cpl. Dylan R. Merola, USMC, Lance Cpl. Kareem M. Nikoui, USMC, Sgt. Johanny Rosario Pichardo, USMC, Cpl. Humberto A. Sanchez, USMC, Lance Cpl. Jared M. Schmitz, USMC, Hospital Corpsman Maxton W. Soviak, USN, and Cpl. Daegan W. Page, USMC, who were killed in the terrorist attack at Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul, Afghanistan, on August 26.