Joseph R. Biden
December 01, 2021

Message to the Congress Transmitting an Agreement Between the Government of the United States of America, the Government of Australia, and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for the Exchange of Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to transmit to the Congress, pursuant to section 123 d. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2153(d)), the text of an Agreement between the Government of the United States of America, the Government of Australia, and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the "United Kingdom") for the Exchange of Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information (the "Agreement"). I am also pleased to transmit my written approval, authorization, and determination concerning the Agreement. The memorandum submitted to me by the Secretary of Energy providing a summary position on the Agreement is also enclosed.
Pursuant to the enhanced trilateral security partnership called "AUKUS" announced earlier this year, our three governments are engaging in an 18-month consultation period to seek an optimal pathway for delivery of nuclear-powered submarines for the Royal Australian Navy at the earliest achievable date. The Agreement would permit the three Parties to communicate and exchange Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information and would provide authorization to share certain Restricted Data as may be needed during trilateral discussions, thereby enabling full and effective consultations.
In my judgment, the Agreement meets all statutory requirements.
I have determined that the United Kingdom and Australia, by participating with the United States pursuant to international arrangements, are making substantial and material contributions to the mutual defense and security. The United Kingdom is party to the North Atlantic Treaty, and Australia is party to the Australia, New Zealand, and United States Security Treaty.
I have approved the Agreement, authorized its execution, and urge that the Congress give it favorable consideration.
JOSEPH R. BIDEN JR.
The White House,
December 1, 2021.
NOTE: An original was not available for verification of the content of this message.