Herbert Hoover
May 29, 1931

Address to the Union League of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Mr. President, members of the Union League Club:
I am deeply honored by your courteous hospitality. When your committee came to me and made the invitation extended to every President of the United States, that I should come to your club, as your guest, I said that in these times of extra and heavy burdens, that I should defer that date in order that I might be prepared, under easier circumstances perhaps, to discuss public questions as my predecessors have done--as they have felt honored to do before this body.
They, however, extended to me a delicate consideration that brooked no refusal--the suggestion that the club would like to extend its hand of encouragement by a reception, with no request for a public address. In these times, when a large number of segments of our population are seeking relief, that was indeed the greatest and most considerate relief ever extended to the President of the United States.
Your generous reception has gone beyond even the frontiers of hospitality. You have presented to Mrs. Hoover and myself a portrait by a skillful artist. It is difficult for me to express, with my natural--I hope natural--modesty, that it gives one pleasure to see oneself presented in a better fashion than the normal snap photograph, and perhaps a justifiable admiration that it may serve as an antidote to some of the current portraits under which I suffer. Yet, I would not criticize that phase of the gift, otherwise it would seem something like the old term about the "gift horse."
I have felt all evening that this club represents more than a comradeship. It is the sanctuary of a great tradition--the tradition of the preservation of our Union, and the preservation of the tradition of loyalty to our Government in the greatest of our trials. That service of the club-protection of the Union--finds its expression in every portion of this building, and all these years the club has stood steadfast for the patriotic solution of the recurring difficulties which have met the Republic. It has pierced the fallacy of many specialized causes; it has favored great measures of progress; it has stood unfailingly in times of public stress with confidence in the ultimate growth and security that distinguishes all thinking men.
After 2 years of fever and tumult in Washington, I assure you this is a gratifying occasion. In these quiet halls, there is a restfulness and a feeling of security--an inspiration of faith in one's country. I shall remember this occasion always with appreciation, not alone for the fine and encouraging words of your President--and even public officials need encouragement but for the opportunity you have given me to meet many old friends, and, I hope, to make new ones; and to come in contact with that spirit of the living men who have to carry the responsibilities of our community, and of our Nation as a whole. On Mrs. Hoover's and my own behalf I do thank you.
Note: The President spoke at a dinner meeting of the league. The address, as printed above, was recorded by court stenographers employed by the Union League. On the same day, the White House issued an advance text of the address.
Preceding the President's address, George S. Patterson, president of the Union League, presented the President with a life-size portrait painted by Philides Costa.