Herbert Hoover
April 03, 1930

Exchange of Remarks With President Juan Campisteguy on the Inauguration of Direct Radiotelephonic Communication Between Uruguay and the United States.
Mr. President:
The memories which I cherish of my brief visit, slightly more than 1 year ago, to the great capital of the progressive Republic of Uruguay, and Your Excellency's friendly and hospitable reception at that time, make more keen the pleasure which I experience today of speaking with you again in person on the occasion of the inauguration of direct radiotelephonic communication between Uruguay and the United States of America.
The history of modern communication bears recorded page on page the participation of Uruguay in the adoption of each of its improvements. As they have been perfected the systems of cable communication, radiotelegraphic communication by air, and now communication by radiotelephone, have promptly been placed in operation between Uruguay and the United States. These increasingly numerous ties, created through the cooperation of scientific endeavor and commercial necessities, form the material part of the strong bond, the other part of which is intellectual and spiritual fraternity, that fortunately exists between our two countries.
Mr. President, it is truly a matter of satisfaction and pleasure to me that this new means of communication between Uruguay and the United States of America is being inaugurated today and to assure you that my pleasure and satisfaction have been enhanced by the occasion this ceremony has afforded me to speak with you again.
Note: President Campisteguy responded as follows:Mr. President:
Across the distance which separates us it is particularly pleasant for me to renew in so direct a manner remembrances of the visit you made to our country, leaving with us such very happy impressions.
May this new and wonderful means of communications, which makes possible in these moments our being placed in spiritual contact, be a promising omen of closer tightening of the bonds which unite our respective peoples.
In this inaugural ceremony, with those desires and this hope, I greet most cordially the chief magistrate of the United States of America.