Herbert Hoover
February 16, 1930

Letter to Felix M. Warburg on the Celebration of Thomas Jefferson's Birthday.
[Released February 16, 1930. Dated February 4, 1930]
My dear Mr. Warburg:
I have your communication setting forth the suggestion that April 13th next, being the birthday of Thomas Jefferson and a Sunday, should be especially marked by proper celebration of the founding of religious freedom. It would seem to me to be a fitting and inspiring undertaking.
As you suggest that I should appoint a committee to undertake such celebration, it is my thought that the Board of Governors of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation already comprises in its membership men and women of outstanding leadership in all directions of national thought, and that it would be desirable that they should undertake to bring the occasion to the attention of the American people and make such arrangements as would give it significance.

Yours faithfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
[Mr. Felix Warburg, 115 Broadway, New York, N.Y. ]
Note: Mr. Warburg's letter, dated December 30, 1929, follows:
My dear Mr. President:
It is a noteworthy and most unusual coincidence, that the religious holy days, known as Palm Sunday and Passover will both occur on April 13th, 1930, the birthday of Thomas Jefferson, author of the world famous Statute for Religious Freedom.
It has been recommended therefore that the day be observed educationally and patriotically. The recommendation has been urged by a number of outstanding citizens including Senator Simeon D. Fess of Ohio, Dr. Edwin A. Alderman, President of the University of Virginia, and others whose opinions were published in the Congressional Record, a copy of which is hereto attached.
To make the celebration worthy of this very unusual coincidence, we are very anxious to have a suitable advisory committee appointed by the President of the United States. We should appreciate it if you would appoint such a committee and consent to be its Honorary Chairman.
The National Educational Committee and the Board of Governors of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation will assist your Committee in having similar committees appointed by Governors and Mayors throughout the country and in the preparation of an educational program predicated upon an Address to the American People by you as President of the United States.
We shall be very grateful to you for whatever assistance you may be able to afford to this educational and patriotic work.
With assurances of our very high esteem and regard, I beg to remain, my dear Mr. Hoover, Yours very respectfully,
FELIX M. WARBURG
Committee on behalf of the Board of Governors
[Honorable Herbert Hoover, President of the United States, White House, Washington, D.C.]