Herbert Hoover
February 12, 1932

Letter Accepting the Resignation of Andrew W. Mellon as Secretary of the Treasury.
My dear Mr. Mellon:
I am in receipt of your resignation as Secretary of the Treasury, which I of course accept.
There is little need for me to comment in appreciation of the eleven years of service you have given to our country. I know of no more magnificent tribute that has come to a public servant than the universal expressions of the press and the public toward you during the past few days.
I am in hopes that your new and important responsibilities will prove congenial, and I am well aware of the extent of the burdens which you are undertaking out of a sense of patriotic duty.
I wish to take this occasion to again express the feeling of personal loss I have after these years of association in the Cabinet.

Yours faithfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
[The Honorable Andrew W. Mellon, Washington, D.C. ]
Note: Mr. Mellon served as Secretary of the Treasury from March 4, 1921, to February 12, 1932, when he assumed his duties as Ambassador to Great Britain. His letter of resignation, dated February 8 and released with the President's, follows:
Dear Mr. President:
I hereby tender my resignation as Secretary of the Treasury, to take effect at your convenience or at such time as you may desire me to assume my duties as Ambassador to Great Britain.
It has been nearly eleven years since I came to the Treasury. I have found it a period of absorbing interest and count it the highest privilege to have had this opportunity for public service. I am leaving the Treasury with the greatest respect for its organization and for the many able men whose support and assistance to me have been so invaluable.
I am also leaving with the highest regard for you and for your Administration, of which I have had the honor of being part. In going to London, I shall miss particularly the pleasant daily association with you here and regret the severance of the ties which have grown up during the long period we have been together in Washington.
Faithfully yours,
A. W. MELLON
Secretary of the Treasury
[The President, The White House]