Herbert Hoover
June 24, 1932

Letter to the President of the Senate Transmitting a Supplemental Estimate of Appropriation for Participation in an International Economic Conference.
Sir:
I have the honor to transmit herewith for the consideration of Congress a supplemental estimate of appropriation for the Department of State for the fiscal year 1932, to remain available until June 30, 1933, amounting to $40,000, for an International Economic Conference to be held in London during the year 1932.
The details of this estimate, the necessity therefor, and the reason for its transmission at this time are set forth in the letter of the Director of the Bureau of the Budget transmitted herewith, with whose comments and observations thereon I concur.

Respectfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
[The President of the Senate]
Note: The text of the letter from the Director of the Budget, also dated June 24, 1932, and transmitted with the President's letter, follows:Sir:
I have the honor to submit herewith for your consideration a supplemental estimate of appropriation for the Department of State for the fiscal year 1932, to remain available until June 30, 1933, amounting to $40,000.
International Economic Conference to be held in London during the year 1932: For the expenses of participation by the United States in an economic conference to be held in London during the year 1932, and for each and every purpose connected therewith, including transportation and subsistence or per diem in lieu thereof (notwithstanding the provisions of the subsistence expense act of 1926, amendments thereof or regulations prescribed pursuant thereto); personal services in the District of Columbia and elsewhere, without reference to the classification act of 1923, as amended; stenographic and other services by contract if deemed necessary without regard to the provisions of section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (U.S.C., title 41, sec. 5); rent of offices and rooms; purchase of necessary books and documents; printing and binding; official cards, entertainment; hire, maintenance, and operation of motor-propelled passenger carrying vehicles; the reimbursement of other appropriations from which payments may have been made for any of the purposes herein specified; and such other expenses as may be authorized by the Secretary of State, fiscal year 1932, to remain available until June 30,
1933 $40, 000
There has been an exchange of views recently between the British and American Governments with regard to the desirability of convening a general economic conference, which would be for the purpose of considering various economic and monetary questions, including methods of improving world-market prices. The British Government later made the suggestion that the conference should be called by the British Government. After due consideration, this Government expressed the opinion that the early convocation of the conference might be of real value in the present depression.
The purpose of this estimate is to provide for the expenses of participation of the United States in the conference.
The foregoing estimate is to meet a contingency which has arisen since the transmission of the Budgets for the fiscal years 1932 and 1933, and its approval is recommended.
Very respectfully,
J. CLAWSON ROOP
Director of the Bureau of the Budget.