Herbert Hoover
September 24, 1930

Letter Accepting the Resignation of Nicholas Roosevelt as Vice Governor of the Philippines.
My dear Mr. Roosevelt:
With reluctance I have concluded to accept your resignation as Vice Governor of the Philippine Islands. I chose you for that post because you would be especially well qualified for it through your knowledge of Philippine conditions and your deep interest in the Filipino people; and I appreciate fully the unselfish spirit that has prompted your withdrawal.
I have determined to appoint you as the United States Minister to Hungary--so that in that other field where you have already worked, the United States may have your service.

Yours faithfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
[Hon. Nicholas Roosevelt, Vice Governor of the Philippine Islands, War Department, Washington, D.C.]
Note: On the same day, the White House issued biographical data on Nicholas Roosevelt and announced that J. Butler Wright, former Minister to Hungary, would be appointed Minister to Uruguay
The text of Mr. Roosevelt's letter of resignation, dated September 24, 1930, and released with the President's letter, follows:
Dear Mr. President:
When you tendered me the recess appointment as Vice Governor of the Philippine Islands, I accepted it with an open mind, anxious to do what I could to further Philippine-American relations, which have been for years my special study.
In my writings I have taken the position that the United States stands in relation to the Philippines as a trustee to its ward and that, in consequence, we cannot withdraw until we have fully discharged the obligations which we assumed on taking over the Islands. To this end I have urged that educational facilities be extended so that, instead of only one child in three attending school, as at present, every child should have a seat in school. I have advocated the extension of the suffrage to include the women of the Philippines. I have pointed out that if ever the Philippines are to be self-sustaining greater attention must be paid to economic development and less to politics. I have fought the restrictions which selfish American interests have sought to place on Philippine products and Filipino immigrants coming into the United States. Finally, I have urged that so long as the American flag flies over the Islands the American administration should be efficient as well as honest and sympathetic.
Unfortunately the Filipino leaders have ignored these views and have, instead, broadcast misrepresentations of my writings with an obvious indifference to the correlation between their statements and the facts. In many cases this has been done by persons who apparently have not even read what I have written, contenting themselves, instead, with isolated sentences twisted from their context.
This one-sided propaganda has tended to create in the Philippine Islands a state of mind 'prejudicial to my present usefulness as Vice Governor. If prolonged, this situation is apt to have unfortunate repercussions in the next session of Congress, during which vitally important discussions of Philippine problems will presumably occur. The fundamental issues then to be considered should not be complicated by questions connected with my appointment, nor should any controversy about my views be permitted to embarrass Philippine-American relations.
Under the circumstances I have decided to place my resignation as Vice Governor of the Philippine Islands in your hands, believing that my services can be more useful elsewhere. Your acceptance of it will not lessen my deep interest in Far Eastern affairs nor diminish the eagerness with which I look forward to revisiting the Philippines.
Thanking you for the honor you have done me in giving me this appointment,
I am,
Respectfully yours,
NICHOLAS ROOSEVELT
[The President of the United States, The White House, Washington, D.C. ]