Herbert Hoover
June 29, 1929

Message to Commander Richard E. Byrd on the Second Anniversary of His Transatlantic Flight.
[Released June 29, 1929. Dated June 20, 1929]
My dear Commander Byrd:
On this second anniversary of your transatlantic flight to France, I wish personally and upon behalf of the Nation to congratulate you and [p.204] your gallant comrades upon that triumph of courage and skill over the resisting forces of Nature, and to wish you all success in your present similar conquests of the Antarctic.
Yours faithfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
Note: The President's message was broadcast in a special radio program to Little America in the Antarctic where, in January 1929, Commander Byrd had established a base for exploration culminating in a flight to the South Pole in November. On April 7, the White House made public a message of April 5 which President Hoover sent to Adolph S. Ochs of the New York Times to be read to Commander Byrd during a radio program sponsored by the Times and WGY shortwave. The message and Commander Byrd's reply follows:
THE PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE
I am sorry that the Antarctic night is about to interrupt the most interesting side of your work but with the radio you will not become lonesome. My best wishes to you and your comrades.
HERBERT HOOVER
COMMANDER BYRD'S REPLY
President Hoover:
We were all very happy to get your message specially as we recall your interest and encouragement when we were struggling to organize our first two polar expeditions. I wish I could let you know the feeling I have about the conduct of the red-blooded fellows with me. Unfortunately I cannot seem to be able to put it properly into words. They have shown great courage and made superhuman effort which has resulted in Little America constructed of hundreds of tons of material transported over miles of treacherous ice. We found the ice of the Bay 7 miles farther seaward than formerly and it might have licked us but for the indomitable spirit of the men. Recently they have toiled cheerfully building tunnels and snowhouses for scientific purposes exposed to temperatures as low as 70 degrees below freezing. They feel a pride in putting on a show down here that will be worthy of Uncle Sam. All join me in well wishes and respectful greetings.
RICHARD E. BYRD