Herbert Hoover
March 29, 1929

Proclamation 1874—Creating a Board To Investigate a Labor Dispute Between the Texas and Pacific Railway Company and Its Employees

Whereas, The President, having been duly notified by the Board of Mediation that a dispute between the Texas and Pacific Railway Company, a carrier, and certain of its employees represented by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen, Order of Railway Conductors, and Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen, which dispute has not been heretofore adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, now threatens substantially to interrupt interstate commerce within the states of Louisiana, Texas, and Arkansas to a degree such as to deprive that section of the country of essential transportation service,
Now, Therefore, I, Herbert Hoover,President of the United States, by virtue of the power vested in me by the constitution and laws of the United States and by virtue of and under the authority in me vested by Section 10, of the Railway Labor Act, do hereby create a Board to be composed of five (5) persons not pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railway employees or any carrier, to investigate such dispute and report their findings to me within thirty (30) days from this date.
The members of this Board shall be compensated for and on account of such duties in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each member for every day actually employed with or upon and on account of travel and duties incident to such Board. The members will be reimbursed for and they are hereby authorized to make expenditures for necessary expenses of themselves and of the Board including travelling expenses and expenses actually incurred for subsistence, in conformity with said Act.
All expenditures of the Board shall be allowed and paid for out of the appropriation "Emergency Boards", Act approved February 11, 1927, Vol. 44 Stat. L. 1072 on the presentation of itemized vouchers properly approved by the Chairman of the Board hereby created.
Donethis twenty-ninth day of March in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred twenty-nine, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred fifty-third.


HERBERT HOOVER
By the President:
J. REUBEN CLARK, JR.
Acting Secretary of State
Note: The Texas and Pacific Railway Company dispute began when the company decided to move its freight yards from Longview Junction and Marshall, Tex., to Mineola, Tex., and Shreveport, La. Affected employees, a number of whom were forced to sell their homes, argued that they should be compensated for any losses and inconveniences involved. They also objected to contemplated changes in work assignments. After negotiations and Federal mediation failed to produce any agreement, four of the railroad brotherhoods (the engineers, firemen, conductors, and trainmen) issued strike orders that were to go into effect on March 30, 1929.