Herbert Hoover
June 26, 1930

Remarks at the Dedication of a Statue of James Buchanan.
My fellow countrymen:
It is my pleasant duty today to take part in the formal dedication of this statue of the 15th President of the United States. These memorials of the past not only pay honor to the virtues of the men who have held the highest office which our citizens can bestow, but they also help to fix in our minds the orderly march of our life as a nation.
James Buchanan, whom we honor here today, occupied the Presidency at a moment when no human power could have stayed the inexorable advance of a great national conflict. The black clouds of dissension had gathered over the country when he entered upon his duties. The thunderbolts of war were withheld until he left the scene, but throughout his administration the sky was clouded with the ominous threatenings of storm.
He had shared in the notable efforts to solve the problem of slavery by compromise. His partners in these efforts were the ablest and most penetrating minds of his day, and it was largely by chance that his Presidency coincided with the ultimate failure of these hopes. He was the last outstanding figure surviving of one of the most remarkable groups of men in our history, and it was his fate to represent them at the moment when they must yield to younger men representing a more aggressive conception of the Nation's duty. He played his part with a dignity and courage that only now are receiving the recognition they deserve.
Mr. Buchanan served his country during a long and active life--as a Senator of prominence and as a diplomat. His first great diplomatic success was in negotiating our first commercial treaty with Russia. He performed important services as Ambassador to London. As Secretary of State under President Polk, he skillfully guided our position with respect to the Oregon boundary and settled this delicate question advantageously and peacefully. Both as negotiator while Ambassador and as director of policies while Secretary of State, Mr. Buchanan established for himself one of the most eminent reputations in these fields in all our history.
His career was rich in achievements deserving the gratitude of his country. But its most appealing side should also be mentioned here. A bachelor, and engrossed in public and private business, he found time to rear and educate an orphaned niece in a manner that would have done credit to any father. His wise and affectionate letters to Harriet Lane are a charming addition to American literature, and are still to be read with pleasure. It is due to Miss Lane's devoted appreciation of his kindness that this statue has been erected, for she left provisions for it in her will. This is, therefore, an occasion not only honoring a great patriot but also testifying to a real filial affection.
I now dedicate the statue of James Buchanan, 15th President of the United States, to the people of this country, for a memorial of his services as a man and as a chief officer of Government.
Note: The President spoke at ceremonies in Meridian Hill Park, Washington, D.C.