Herbert Hoover
December 12, 1932

Remarks on Accepting the Deed to Theodore Roosevelt Island.
Mr. Garfield and members of the Committee:
The fame of President Theodore Roosevelt has grown in lustre and stature as the years have passed. Time constantly brings his essential greatness into clearer and clearer outline. His accomplishments will bulk large in the pages of history, but equally he will be remembered for his personality and his character. His was a virile energy, an abundant optimism and courage, a greatness of vision, and a faith in his country's future which knew no boundaries of limiting doubts. These qualities inherent within him and his strength were unconsciously developed in communion with nature. He lived much in the open; he loved the mountains, the woods, the streams, and the sea. From them he gained a spaciousness of outlook which permanently endear him to his countrymen.
There is thus an especial appropriateness in this memorial which you are giving to the Nation. This wooded island set in the midst of the Potomac is forever within view of the Lincoln Memorial, the Washington Monument, the Capitol, and the White House. You have wisely chosen a bit of nature within the boundaries of the city which he loved and where he rendered such noble service. As years go by, the Nation will add to its usefulness and its appropriateness as a memorial to so great a President.
In the name of the people of the United States and on behalf of the Federal Government, I accept this gift and tender to you and to the thousands of citizens whose generosity made it possible, their warmest commendation and grateful thanks. In consummation of these purposes I direct that Analostan Island shall hereafter be known as Theodore Roosevelt Island and dedicated to the Nation.
Note: The President spoke at 4 p.m. in the East Room of the White House. The trustees of the Roosevelt Memorial Association presented the deed to the island. James R. Garfield was president of the association and had served as Secretary of the Interior in President Roosevelt's Cabinet.