Herbert Hoover
June 10, 1929

Remarks Upon Laying the Cornerstone of the New Department of Commerce Building.
ON AN OCCASION which so peculiarly marks the progress of this great national institution it is a particular pleasure to welcome those men who, as former Secretaries of Commerce, have contributed to its upbuilding. And I may perhaps be pardoned for an especial pride on this occasion, having served for 7 years in the Department, and having had some part in the design and initiation of this building. Those who have presided over this Department truly appreciate the significance and the inspiration of this occasion. It marks the emergence of the Department of Commerce into full maturity and service.
Setting the cornerstone of any great public building in the city of Washington is also a milestone of progress, not only of the Capital but of the Nation as a whole. This building will be not only the largest single public structure in the city, but in its actual floor space, it is said to be the largest office building in the world. It represents the most important structure in the new program for better accommodation of our Government and the beautification of our National Capital.
We use today the trowel with which President Washington laid the cornerstone of the Capitol, 136 years ago. Its use cannot but recall the growth of this city and of our country which that period so uniquely represents. When President Washington laid that cornerstone, this particular spot was but a swamp traversed by little more than a cowpath which led from the beginnings of the Capitol to the beginnings of the White House. Even when, 7 years later, the administrative bureaus of the Government were moved from New York and Philadelphia and set up in Washington, they consisted in entire personnel of officials and clerical force of less than 150 persons. Since that time the administrative functions of the Government have been expanded year by year until they now require 20 times as many officials for each million of people as were required then. While there may be complaints over the [p.181] expansion in other directions, this Department cannot be a subject of them for it is devoted solely to aid and foster the development of higher standards of living and comfort of our people.
The beginnings of the idea to create a Department of Commerce are perhaps obscure. There was no provision in the Constitution for any Cabinet officer, department, or bureau. A nation struggling for liberty and freedom naturally gave more thought to provision for fundamental freedom by formulation of law for its protection than to the administration of those laws, but necessarily administration quickly followed.
In advising upon the divisions into which administrative work should be assigned, it is said that Alexander Hamilton proposed the creation of six departments--State, Treasury, War, Justice, Post Office, and Trade. But out of economy the last named department was not created. It was not until 114 years later that the functions which he then described emerged as the Department of Commerce.
As Secretary of the Treasury, however, Hamilton's vision well comprehended the necessities of Federal Government activity in support of commerce and industry. Of the bureaus which are now included in the Department of Commerce, those of Patents, Census, Lighthouses, and Navigation were established by him in the Treasury. During .the hundred years before the founding of the Department, other bureaus were created and finally brought together into a homogeneous organization with full Cabinet representation under President Roosevelt, and with Mr. [George B.] Cortelyou as its first Secretary. The 26 years since its foundation have shown an extraordinary expansion and change until the Department has evolved into its present impressive size and helpfulness.
And its ideals are clear: that by cooperation and not by compulsion it should seek to assist in maintaining and giving the impulse of progress to commerce and industry in a nation whose successful economic life underlies advancement in every other field.
Note: The President spoke at a ceremony at the corner of 14th St. and Constitution Ave. NW., at 4 p.m. on Monday, June 10, 1929. The building was occupied on January 1, 1932.