Herbert Hoover
October 27, 1930

Remarks on the Deposit of the Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty for the Limitation and Reduction of Naval Armament.
IT IS a remarkable occasion, a mark of the growing association of peoples, when hundreds of millions of peoples of great nations are made themselves a part of a great event in the progress of peace through the radio.
Today the Governments of Great Britain, Japan, and the United States have deposited the instruments of ratification to the London Naval Treaty. Prime Minister MacDonald from London and Premier Hamaguchi from Japan are joining with me in speaking to you to mark the significance of this realization of further advancement in the world's hopes of a practical limitation of naval armament.
The task begun 18 months ago for the limitation of all types of naval vessels thus draws to a close. The naval powers have bridged obstacles and achieved an understanding to relieve their peoples of excessive naval burdens. Three of these powers commanding the greater part of the world's naval forces have turned away from rivalry in armaments, and disproportionate growth of their navies is now prevented by an arrangement rounded in common sense.
This relinquishment of competitive building among the three great naval powers with its consequent contribution to the security of the world is the greatest significance of this treaty. If the limitations now established can be maintained, we may look forward with assurance to the fact that future conferences will find it easier to bring about further steps in reduction. It is the fervent prayer of right-thinking men and women of this generation that the international confidence which has been so patiently and single-mindedly achieved may endure so that the agreements which have been reached may live and be extended. Never again must a race in naval armaments be allowed to develop.
France and Italy are not as yet full partners in the London treaty. They have been making active efforts within the last few months to arrive at a complete understanding. The people of Great Britain, Japan, and the United States, and indeed the peoples of the whole world, have watched those efforts and confidently hope that patience and good will may yet lead to a solution.
The sessions of the five powers at London have served to strengthen mutual trust and confidence among them, and they give me assurance that the hopes of the world will not be disappointed. It is a pleasure to felicitate the peoples of Great Britain and Japan, and the people of this country, upon the conclusion of a sound and reasonable agreement between them, fair to all and dangerous to none, which has been accepted by each nation as affording adequate protection and which substitutes for suspicion and competition mutual trust, good will and confidence. Let this day fill us with thanks and inspire us to go forward with the courage of hope.
Note: The President spoke at 10 a.m. on a world radio hookup during ceremonies that also featured remarks by British Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald and Japanese Premier Yuko Hamaguchi. Around the table in London, where the ratifications were deposited, were the Ambassadors of the United States, Japan, France, and Italy, the prime ministers of the British Dominions, and the High Commissioner of India.