Herbert Hoover
December 09, 1932

Special Message to Congress on Reorganization of the Executive Branch.
To the Senate and House of Representatives:
The Congress, on June 30, 1932, enacted provisions for the reorganization of the executive departments, which subject I have from time to time laid before the Congress.
The declared policy of the Congress, as set out in section 401 of title 4, part 2, of this act, follows:
"Sec. 401. In order to further reduce expenditures and increase efficiency in government it is declared to be the policy of Congress--
"(a) To group, coordinate, and consolidate executive and administrative agencies of the Government, as nearly as may be, according to major purpose;
"(b) To reduce the number of such agencies by consolidating those having similar functions under a single head;
"(c) To eliminate overlapping and duplication of effort; and
"(d) To segregate regulatory agencies and functions from those of an administrative and executive character."
To accomplish these purposes, the President was authorized by Executive order to transfer executive agencies to and from departments and independent executive agencies and to designate titles and duties of the officials connected therewith.
The act provides that such Executive orders must be transmitted to the Congress while in session and that they shall not become effective until the expiration of 60 calendar days, unless the Congress shall in the meantime approve them. In accordance with this authorization, I am transmitting herewith to the Congress Executive orders which have been issued to-day, transferring and grouping a large number of executive agencies.
A further limitation was placed upon Executive action in the provision that statutory functions may not be abolished by Executive orders, the effect of which renders it necessary to retain many commissions, but, under the orders issued, their administrative functions are placed under various departments, the commissions retaining their advisory functions only. A total of 58 executive agencies and parts of agencies have been grouped or consolidated. One effect is to reduce by about 15 the number of independent agencies and commissions.
I have made no estimate of the extent of the economies which will eventually result from this reorganization program. The total appropriations for the present fiscal year to these agencies is approximately $700,000,000.
These orders constitute the necessary initial action required in carrying out the policy which the Congress has proclaimed in connection with reorganization of the executive branch of the Federal Government. They undertake to group certain executive agencies and activities in logical and Orderly relation to each other as determined by their major functions and purposes, and to vest in the head of each department, subject to Executive approval, the authority and responsibility to develop and put into effect the ultimate details of better organization, elimination of overlap, duplication, and unnecessary expenditure. These results can only be worked out progressively by the executive officers placed in charge of the different divisions.
An example of the value of such grouping and consolidation is well shown in the increased efficiency and administrative economies brought about through the consolidation of agencies relating to veterans' service and likewise of enforcement activities which were authorized some time ago.
I have under consideration further consolidations and grouping in the different departments, including certain functions of the Army and Navy, which I hope to be able to transmit to the Congress at a later date.
PUBLIC WORKS
I have established a Division of Public Works in the Department of the Interior and designated that the title of one of the present Assistant Secretaries shall be changed to "Assistant Secretary of Interior for Public Works," under whose direction I have grouped the following organizations and functions:
1. The Bureau of Reclamation, now in the Department of the Interior.
2. The Geological Survey, now in the Department of the Interior.
3. The Office of the Supervising Architect, which is transferred from the Treasury Department to the Department of the Interior.
4. The nonmilitary activities (except the Survey of Northern and Northwestern Lakes and the Supervisor of New York Harbor) administered under the direction or supervision of the Chief of Engineers, United States Army, including rivers and harbors and flood control work, and the duties, powers, and functions of the Mississippi River Commission, the California Debris Commission, the Joint Board of Engineers for the St. Lawrence River Waterway, the Board of Engineers for Rivers and Harbors, and the Interoceanic Canal Board, which are transferred from the War Department to the Department of the Interior, and the said commissions and boards shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
5. The activities and duties relating to the construction, repair and maintenance of roads, tramways, ferries, bridges, and trails in the Territory of Alaska, now in the Department of the Interior.
6. The Bureau of Public Roads, which is transferred from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of the Interior.
7. The Office of Public Buildings and Public Parks, which is transferred from its status as an independent establishment to the Department of the Interior.
8. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the National Capital Park and Planning Commission, which are transferred to the Department of the Interior, and the commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
9. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway Commission, which are transferred to the Department of the Interior, and the commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
10. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the Arlington Memorial Bridge Commission, which are transferred to the Department of the Interior, and the commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
11. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the Commission of Fine Arts, which are transferred to the Department of the Interior, and the commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
12. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the George Rogers Clark Sesquicentennial Commission, which are transferred to the Department of the Interior, and the commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
13. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the Mount Rushmore National Memorial Commission, which are transferred to the Department of the Interior, and the commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
14. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the General Supply Committee, Treasury Department, which are transferred to the Department of the Interior, and the committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
15. The Government fuel yards, which are transferred from the Bureau of Mines, Department of Commerce, to the Department of the Interior.
EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND RECREATION
I have established a Division of Education, Health, and Recreation in the Department of the Interior and have designated that one of the Assistant Secretaries shall be called "Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Education, Health, and Recreation," and have transferred to that division the following organizations and functions:
1. The Office of Education, now in the Department of the Interior.
2. Howard University, now in the Department of the Interior.
3. The Columbia Institution for the Deaf, now in the Department of the Interior.
4. The American Printing House for the Blind, which is transferred from the Treasury Department to the Office of Education.
5. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the Federal Board for Vocational Education which are transferred to the Office of Education, and the board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of the Interior.
6. The Bureau of Indian Affairs, now in the Department of the Interior.
7. The Public Health Service, which is transferred from the Treasury Department to the Department of the Interior.
8. The Division of Vital Statistics, which is transferred from the Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce, to the Public Health Service in the Department of the Interior.
9. St. Elizabeths Hospital, now in the Department of the Interior.
10. Freedman's Hospital, now in the Department of the Interior.
11. The National Park Service, now in the Department of the Interior.
12. The national parks, monuments, and cemeteries, which are transferred from the War Department to the Department of the Interior.
LAND UTILIZATION
I have established a Division of Land Utilization in the Department of Agriculture to include functions whose major purpose relates to the protection and utilization of land and its inherent natural resources, and have designated a change in the title of the Assistant Secretary to "Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Land Utilization," and have transferred to that Division the following organizations and functions:
1. The Forest Service, now in the Department of Agriculture.
2. The General Land Office, which is transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Agriculture.
3. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the Committee on the Conservation and Administration of the Public Domain, which are transferred to the Department of Agriculture, and the committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of Agriculture.
4. The Advisory Council of the National Arboretum, now in the Department of Agriculture.
5. The Bureau of Biological Survey, now in the Department of Agriculture.
6. The Bureau of Chemistry and Soils, now in the Department of Agriculture.
7. Various fractions of Bureaus already in the Department of Agriculture dealing with this major purpose will be subsequently added to this general division.
THE MERCHANT MARINE
I have established a Merchant Marine Division in the Department of Commerce and an Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Merchant Marine, and have transferred to that division the following organizations and functions:
1. The Coast and Geodetic Survey, now in the Department of Commerce.
2. The Hydrographic Office of the Bureau of Navigation of the Navy Department to the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
3. The Survey of Northern and Northwestern Lakes of the Office of the Chief of Engineers of the War Department to the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
4. The Bureau of Navigation and Steamboat Inspection, now in the Department of Commerce.
5. The Supervisor of New York Harbor of the Office of the Chief of Engineers of the War Department and the powers and duties of said Supervisor to the Bureau of Navigation and Steamboat Inspection.
6. The Naval Observatory of the Bureau of Navigation of the Navy Department, with the exception of those activities that have to do with the development, maintenance, and repair of instruments for the Navy, to the Department of Commerce.
7. The United States Shipping Board Merchant Fleet Corporation to the Department of Commerce.
8. The Inland Waterways Corporation of the War Department to the Department of Commerce.
9. The Bureau of Lighthouses, now in the Department of Commerce.
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
I have transferred to the Department of Commerce or the bureaus thereof, as indicated, the following organizations and functions which involve services in the interest of commerce and industry:
1. The powers and duties of the Federal Oil Conservation Board to the Bureau of Mines, and the said board is abolished.
2. The administrative duties, powers, and authority of the National Screw Thread Commission to the Bureau of Standards, and the Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of Commerce.
3. The administrative duties, powers, and functions of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics to the Bureau of Standards, and the committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of Commerce.
4. The Weather Bureau of the Department of Agriculture to the Department of Commerce.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
I have transferred to and consolidated with the Department of Justice the powers, duties, and functions of the Alien Property Custodian, and the powers and duties now exercised by the Veterans' Administration which relate to the defense in court of cases involving litigation arising under section 19 of the World War Veterans' Act of 1924, as amended.
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
I have transferred to and consolidated with the Department of Labor the powers and duties now exercised by the Employees' Compensation Commission which relate to the administration of the longshoremen's and harbor workers' act of March 4, 1927, and the Act of May 17, 1928, extending the provisions of the 1927 Act to private employers and their employees in the District of Columbia.
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
I have transferred to and consolidated with the Civil Service Commission the powers and duties of the Employees' Compensation Commission which relate to the administration of the Act of September 7, 1916, and amendments thereto, providing compensation on account of injuries sustained by civilian employees of the Federal Government and the Municipal Government of the District of Columbia, leaving the Employees' Compensation Commission to serve in an advisory capacity to the Civil Service Commission pending its abolition by legislative action.
BORDER PATROL
I have transferred to and consolidated with the Coast Guard in the Treasury Department the following services:
1. The border patrol from the Immigration Service in the Department of Labor, and
2. The Border Patrol from the Customs Service in the Treasury Department.
BUREAU OF THE BUDGET
I have transferred and consolidated the following activities in the Bureau of the Budget:
1. The powers and duties now exercised by the General Accounting Office which relate to the designing, prescribing, and installation of accounting forms, systems, and procedure in the several executive departments and independent establishments, except that the Comptroller General shall retain the power and duty to prescribe the form and manner in which accounts shall be submitted to his office for audit.
2. The powers and duties now exercised by the General Accounting Office which relate to the administrative examination of fiscal offcers' accounts and claims against the United States, and the adequacy and effectiveness of the administrative examination of accounts and claims in the respective departments and establishments and the adequacy and effectiveness of departmental inspection of the officers and accounts of fiscal officers.
3. The powers and duties of the Bureau of Efficiency.
RECOMMENDATIONS REQUIRING LEGISLATION
I recommend that legislation be enacted to accomplish the following additional changes in organization which the law does not confer upon me authority to make:
1. Abolish the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway Commission, whose powers and duties are transferred to the Department of the Interior. This commission has accomplished the purpose for which it was created and need no longer be retained as a separate entity.
2. Transfer jurisdiction over the operation, protection, and maintenance of the parks, parkways, playgrounds, and recreational activities of the District of Columbia, from the Office of Public Buildings and Public Parks to the Commissioners of the District of Columbia, making it possible to consolidate and coordinate these activities with similar functions now performed by the Municipal Government of the District, and relieving the Federal Government of the control of activities which are purely local in character and which are paid for out of District of Columbia funds.
3. Abolish the Employees' Compensation Commission. I have transferred those duties and activities of the commission which involve relations between private employers and their employees to the Department of Labor, and the remainder of its duties and activities, involving relations of the Federal Government and the Municipal Government of the District of Columbia, with their own employees, to the Civil Service Commission. This leaves no justification for the retention of the Employees' Compensation Commission.
4. Abolish the Board of Trustees of the National Training School for Boys, and transfer the powers, duties, and functions of that board to the Board of Public Welfare of the District of Columbia. The practice of committing delinquent boys to this institution from jurisdictions outside of the District of Columbia has been generally discontinued. This will automatically convert it into a local reform school, the management of which should be entrusted to local authorities. A similar change in jurisdiction over the National Training School for Girls was made by an act approved March 16, 1926.
I am submitting herewith not only Executive orders but also a brief discussion prepared by the Bureau of the Budget of the proposed transfers and the basis on which they are predicated.
HERBERT HOOVER

The White House,

December 9, 1932.
Note: The message and accompanying documents are printed as House Document 493 (72d Cong., 2d sess.).
For Executive Orders 5959-5969, issued on December 9, 1932, and transmitted with the message, see "Proclamations and Executive Orders, Herbert Hoover," vol. II, pp. 1350-1372. On January 19, 1933, the House of Representatives passed House Resolution 334, disapproving the 11 Executive orders and preventing them from taking effect.