Herbert Hoover
August 07, 1931

Statement on the Organization for Unemployment Relief
THE PRESIDENT said:
"During the past 3 weeks I have been engaged, together with members of the administration, in a study of the problems of unemployment and relief likely to confront us over the coming winter and the organization necessary to meet the situation. While improvement in the situation in many directions seems promising, the problem, whatever it may be, will be met. With the organized cooperation of local and State and Federal authorities, and the large number of relief and charitable organizations, the problem was successfully handled last winter. We shall adapt organization methods in such manner as may be necessary for the coming winter.
"The first of the facts to be determined is the probable volume of the load of distress which will need to be provided for. The various bureaus of the Government are engaged in an exhaustive study of last winter's experience of all organizations in the average number of persons in distress and their location. Further examination is being made of the probable load during next winter. The economic changes during the year will materially improve certain areas and others may be worse. These reports are not yet complete.
"The second requirement is to appraise the action now in progress, the agencies which are available for the winter, the methods which have proved successful, and the organization needed to cooperate with these agencies. I have been in communication with several Governors and with other public authorities. Already many States and municipalities have begun to lay the foundation for action necessary to meet their problems.
"I have been canvassing the situation in conference with business, financial, and labor leaders as to the different methods in interstate industries which may be of aid."I have had a number of conferences with leaders of relief and business organizations throughout the country with view to consolidation and coordination of their efforts to support the national, State, and local action.
"We have now underway a reexamination to determine the actual number to be employed through the steadily increasing volume of Federal public works. We are canvassing State and municipal and industrial construction to ascertain what may be expected in that direction.
"The completion of these conferences and inquiries will require other month. By that time all the facts should be clear both as to the load to be met, the progress and strength of organization in different regions, and the character and method of national organization necessary to coordinate and support them."