Herbert Hoover
August 18, 1930

Telegram to the Governor of Oklahoma Transmitting the Recommendations of the White House Conference on Drought Relief.
I AM mailing you a copy of the recommendations of the Governors' Conference of last Thursday, setting out the form of organization which we believe will be most effective. I shall be glad to cooperate with you in every way.
HERBERT HOOVER
[Honorable W. J. Holloway, Governor, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma ]
Note: Oklahoma was not represented in the White House Conference on Drought Relief, but on August 16, 1930, Governor Holloway sent a telegram to the President asking to be included in the Federal program.
On August 19, Governor Holloway responded, as follows:
As the Governor of Oklahoma I wish to express my full approval for the steps you are taking to aid the drouth stricken areas of the country. I thank you for your telegram of today advising that Oklahoma will receive your full cooperation and assistance in your plans. Today we perfected the organization of a state wide drouth committee which I appointed last Saturday. In a few days we will have perfected the full organization down to the counties as suggested by you in press reports. The Oklahoma committee will cooperate one hundred per cent with 'federal government in bringing about necessary assistance to those states which need it. At our meeting today I stated to the state-wide committee that while I fully appreciated the wise and timely steps being taken by the federal government I thought it was a mistake for Oklahoma to expect the federal government to do anything for Oklahoma which Oklahoma could not do for herself.
Our state is rich in resources and our citizens expect to do everything possible themselves to relieve [the] situation. I think it unjust and unwise for any state to expect the federal government to furnish all the aid necessary in this crisis. While we are anxious for any and all benefits that the federal government may furnish Oklahoma, yet you may expect Oklahoma to do her full part in solving her own problems.
GOVERNOR W. J. HOLLOWAY