Herbert Hoover
December 22, 1931

The President's News Conference
ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAM
THE PRESIDENT. In the many conferences that I have had with the leaders of the House and Senate they all assure me that Congress will devote itself to the expeditious passage of the emergency economic program which I proposed for the amelioration of the agricultural, employment, and credit situations. I had urged that the proposed congressional holiday should be shortened, but the leaders inform me that they do not believe it is possible to maintain a quorum before January 4. They do assure me, however, that the measures which are uncompleted before the holidays will receive immediate attention after reconvening and that I may be assured that the Reconstruction Finance Corporation will be the first to receive consideration, and that there is amply sufficient cohesion in Congress to assure its very rapid passage.
HOLIDAYS FOR GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
I have received requests from Federal employees of the District that they should be given two periods of holidays so as to cover the Saturday following Christmas and from New Year's Day to January 4. While I see little objection to the day following Christmas in order that Federal employees may have an opportunity to join their families out of town, I do not feel that we should extend the holidays at New Year's. We cannot suspend functioning of the Federal Government in these times.
U.S. DELEGATION TO THE GENERAL DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE
General [Charles G.] Dawes will head the disarmament delegation. Mr. [Henry P.] Fletcher finds that he will not be able to accept membership on the Commission, I am sorry to say. The whole question of disarmament is and has been of profound interest to the women of the United States. They have shown great interest in it for many years, and I have determined to appoint a leading woman as a member of the delegation. I am now in discussion with a lady of qualities and prominence as to her acceptance of that mission.

That is, I think, all that I have on this occasion.
Note: President Hoover's two hundred and twenty-fifth news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, December 22, 1931.
On the same day, the White House issued texts of the President's statements on the economic recovery program (see Item 447), the holidays for Government employees (see Item 448), and the United States delegation to the General Disarmament Conference (see Item 449).