Herbert Hoover
August 12, 1932

The President's News Conference
THE PRESIDENT. We have got a large conference for small news, I haven't anything of any importance to say.
PRESIDENT'S ORGANIZATION ON UNEMPLOYMENT RELIEF
Mr. [Walter S.] Gifford has fulfilled his term in charge of the organization for coordination of unemployment relief. He undertook the direction of it over the winter, and he has finally insisted that I find someone else to take it over the next winter, and that I will do in the course of the next month or two.
CONFERENCE OF FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT BANKING AND INDUSTRIAL COMMITTEES
On the 29th of July I gave you some indication of a program which we had in course for coordinating activities of an economic character both of governmental and private business. We have made further progress with that, and I am now about to set the date when we shall call a general conference in Washington when we shall have representatives of each Federal Reserve district, together with the other groups that are appropriate for a general discussion of the subject that I outlined on the 29th of July. At that time we will have a more definite program developed for submission. I would have liked to have given you the date, but I have got it unsettled as between two figures, and I will let you know in the course of Monday.
ADDRESS ACCEPTING REPUBLICAN NOMINATION
I have received the greatest flood of telegrams that has ever come into the White House this morning as the result of last night's address, and we will not be able to make the usual personal acknowledgment to all of them with our present staff and equipment. If you have the opportunity I would be glad if you would express my personal appreciation of the extraordinary support which has come to me by communication.

That is all I have today.
Note: The President's two hundred and fifty-sixth news conference was held in the White House at 4 p.m. on Friday, August 12, 1932. On the same day, the White House issued a text of the President's letter accepting the resignation of Walter S. Gifford as Director of the President's Organization on Unemployment Relief (see Item 261).