Herbert Hoover
August 26, 1930

The President's News Conference
WELCOMING THE GUESTS OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION
THE PRESIDENT. I would like to take this occasion to state how gratified I am at the presence in Washington of the visiting lawyers representing the bar and bench from Great Britain, France, Ireland, and Canada. These gentlemen are among the most eminent members of their profession and it is a great compliment to the United States that they should pay us this visit. They come as guests of the American Bar Association and they come as a gesture of friendliness and good will to the great profession on our side of the Atlantic. I am sure that the whole country responds to the evidences of hospitality which have been given by the American Bar Association.
UNITED STATES TARIFF COMMISSION
I have appointed Mr. Thomas Walker Page as a member of the Tariff Commission. He will take office at the expiration of the present Commission, September 16th. Some of you may remember that he was a member of the board previously and was at one time its Chairman, retiring in 1922. He comes as a Democratic member.
DROUGHT RELIEF
I have some inquiries about drought relief. News on that subject hereafter must be gotten from Secretary Hyde as he is familiar with what is going on. I might say, however, that there is a meeting this afternoon of the banker members of the different State committees in the hope of working out coordination between private banking systems and the Government agencies. As to railway special rates into drought areas, 300 cars were started yesterday, half of which went to Virginia, the others scattered through the States.
I do not want to be quoted. I am just giving you a lead as to what you may get from Secretary Hyde. He has started his new divisions on transportation and distribution of food and feed. General impression is that the special strain has now been relieved by the rains in drought areas, except in localities which have not yet benefited. The Shenandoah Valley happens to be one of the worst. The effect of the rain is to delay present pressures, but, of course, the problem will develop its worst weight as we get into the winter.
I think the Governors' committees have now been organized and are organizing subcommittees. We have an effective organization that can meet any emergency.

And that is all for today.
Note: President Hoover's one hundred and thirty-seventh news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, August 26, 1930.
On the same day, the White House issued biographical data on Thomas Walker Page and a text of the President's statement welcoming the guests of the American Bar Association (see Item 277).