Herbert Hoover
May 14, 1929

The President's News Conference
TARIFF INCREASES
THE PRESIDENT. I have a little grist this morning. First, you can quote this, if you want to, or put it in any form you like.
I propose to promulgate the tariff increases which were recently recommended by the majority of the Tariff Commission on linseed, milk, cream, and window glass.
The tariff on linseed is increased from 40 cents a bushel at present, by 16 cents, to 56 cents a bushel; on milk from present tariff of 2 1/2 cents to 3 3/4 cents a gallon; on cream, from present tariff of 20 cents to 30 cents per gallon. On window glass increases vary from 5/8 cent per pound to 1 1/2 cents per pound, depending upon size.
The Tariff Commission is limited in its recommendations to 50 percent of the duty as imposed in the 1922 law, and therefore, some of the increases are less than those recommended by the Ways and Means Committee of the House. None of them are in excess of their recommendations.
I have consulted the congressional leaders as to the desirability of issuing these proclamations, and they agree that the farmers and others should have the benefit of the Tariff Commission's determinations at once.
Some other reports of the Commission, on which there is either no majority of the Commission or where new facts appear to have developed, have been sent back to the Commission for reconsideration.
APPOINTMENT OF MAJOR GENERAL MASON M. PATRICK
I have appointed Major General Patrick, retired, a member of the District [of Columbia] Public Utilities Commission. General Patrick is a distinguished engineer officer, and his last service, as you all know, was as the chief of the Air Service.
NAVAL REDUCTION PROGRAM
Now, some things for your information. In respect to the questions on the further steps to be taken in the naval reduction program, you will remember that the Preparatory Commission referred the American proposals to the naval powers for study. That is the study now in progress. There is, therefore, no reason for determining further steps until that examination is further advanced.
As to further questions about the conference of 1932 that was provided for in the Washington naval agreement, I have no information to give because we have given no consideration to that conference at all.
OTHER QUESTIONS
Now some other questions:
I have no plans for the summer, and shall make none until the situation becomes somewhat clearer.
No one has been selected for Governor Generalship of the Philippines, nor the Governorship of Porto Rico.
I have no speaking engagements in the near future except the usual Memorial Day exercises at Arlington.
I am not yet ready to announce the membership of the Law Enforcement Commission.
Note: President Hoover's twenty-first news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, May 14, 1929.
On the same day, the President signed Proclamation 1879, dealing with rates of duty on glass, Proclamation 1880 on milk and cream, and Proclamation 1881 on flaxseed. The White House released announcements of the proclamations on glass and on milk and cream and the investigations leading to their issuance.