Gerald R. Ford
April 08, 1976

Remarks Upon Signing a Special Message to the Congress and a Memorandum on the Federal Summer Employment Program for Youth
Governor Ray, Secretary Usery, Chairman Hampton, distinguished mayors, and county of officials :
We have all been very encouraged by the steady improvement in the economy in the last several months. The Secretary of Labor also advises me that the youth employment situation has shown some gain in the past few months and is optimistic about the future. Nevertheless, with the advent of summer vacations it is very, very clear that more young people will be seeking jobs than the private sector will be able to provide.
I am, therefore, formally transmitting to the Congress today, an urgent supplemental request that would provide $528 million to support jobs for over 888,000 disadvantaged youths this summer. If the Congress will act promptly on my request local CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] sponsors will be able to provide meaningful work and training opportunities for substantial numbers of young people this summer.
I am also sending a memorandum today to the heads of all Federal Departments and Agencies calling upon them to cooperate fully with the efforts of the Civil Service Commission to provide summer jobs in Government for an additional 54,000 needy youths.
Finally, on a related matter, let me again urge the Congress to act on my request of January for $1,700 million to continue the existing public service employment program. Many local prime sponsors of CETA are running very short of funds and will have to lay off people if Congress does not act readily. Whatever differences of opinion may exist on the job creation issue, there is no reason why local officials and those already employed by CETA public service jobs should be kept in suspense and in fear of layoffs.
I hope and trust that the Congress will act promptly on these important matters, and I am now very pleased to sign these two measures.

I hope it is as easy to get the money as it is to sign the message. [Laughter]

Thank you all very, very much.
Note: The President spoke at 3:40 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. In his opening remarks, he referred to Governor Robert D. Ray of Iowa, Secretary of Labor W. J. Usery, Jr., and Chairman of the U.S. Civil Service Commission Robert E. Hampton.