Gerald R. Ford
December 03, 1974

Letter Accepting the Resignation of William E. Timmons as Assistant to the President.
Dear Bill:
It is with the deepest regret, but also with immense gratitude for your many years of dedicated service to our Nation, that I accept your resignation as Assistant to the President, effective December 31, 1974, as you requested. In so doing, I want you to know that I fully understand the personal concerns which prompted your decision.
For more than twenty-two years, you have made outstanding contributions to the public service through your skillful, energetic leadership, sound judgment and a confident sense of our national well-being. Your years as Assistant to the President for Legislative Affairs have been ones of great challenge but also high achievement as decisions have been made and legislative programs molded which will assure a peaceful, prosperous future for all our fellow citizens. You will be missed here at the White House, and I know I can speak for my former colleagues in Congress in saying they too will miss you as the President's liaison with Capitol Hill.
I particularly want to take this opportunity to express my personal appreciation for the unhesitating, loyal and highly capable assistance you have given my Administration since I assumed the Presidency last summer. Your certain support and wise counsel were, throughout those early, critically important days, a constant source of strength and confidence for me. You have my thanks and my lasting gratitude.

Betty joins me in wishing you and your family the very best in the years ahead.

Sincerely,

JERRY FORD
[The Honorable William E. Timmons, The White House, Washington, D.C.]
Note: Mr. Timmons' letter of resignation, released with the President's letter, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
I respectfully submit my resignation as your Assistant for Legislative Affairs effective December 31, 1974.
My decision to leave public service after twenty-two years has not been easy, but pressing personal affairs now require my attention. I will depart your service with immense gratitude for being given the opportunity to participate in our national Government.
I regret I will be unable to share the many exciting challenges and opportunities the future holds for you. However, I will leave with the greatest confidence in your leadership, comforted by firsthand knowledge of your abilities, and with warm affection for you, the First Lady and family.
Your character, philosophy and commitment will remain a source of inspiration and strength to me. Best wishes for the accomplishments I know you'll enjoy.
Sincerely,
WILLIAM E. TIMMONS
Assistant to the President
[Honorable Gerald R. Ford, The President, The White House, Washington, D.C.]