Gerald R. Ford
December 24, 1974

Letter Accepting the Resignation of William D. Eberle as Special Representative for Trade Negotiations.
Dear Bill:
I have your letter of December 17, and it is with deep regret that I accept your resignation as Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy, and as my Special Representative for Trade Negotiations.
For more than three years, you have served our Nation with the greatest devotion and distinction. You can be very proud of the vital role you played in helping to develop and carry out our country's international economic and trade programs, often under the most demanding circumstances. Your skills in the area of trade negotiations have won you the respect of your colleagues throughout the Government as well as the esteem of the economic and business community for the many substantial contributions you have made in advancing America's position in the world marketplace. You deserve the heartfelt thanks of your fellow citizens, and I want to take this opportunity to express my own admiration and gratitude.
I am grateful, too, for your offer of assistance in the future. You can be sure if the occasion arises we will not hesitate to take advantage of your talents. You have my best wishes for success and happiness in the years ahead.

Sincerely,

JERRY FORD
[ The Honorable William D. Eberle, The White House, Washington, D.C.]
Note: Mr. Eberle's letter of resignation, dated December 17, 1974. and released with the President's letter at Vail, Colo., read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
It is my personal desire to return to the private sector after more than three years of Government service, and am therefore submitting my resignation as Executive Director of the Council on International Economic Policy and as your Special Representative for Trade Negotiations. I hardly need say that I came to the decision only after considerable thought. It has been a privilege and a most rewarding opportunity to have served the Government of the United States, and I take this decision with a sense of regret.
I want to thank you, Mr. President, for the honor of serving our country that has been given me and to wish your Administration the very best. I will stand ready as a private citizen to continue to assist you in any way that I can.
W. D. EBERLE
[The President, The White House, Washington, D.C.]