Gerald R. Ford
December 13, 1974

Letter Accepting the Resignation of William B. Saxbe as Attorney General of the United States.
Dear Bill:
I have your letter of December 12 and, for the purpose of keeping the records straight, I will, of course, accept your resignation as Attorney General of the United States, effective upon the appointment and qualification of your successor or your own appointment and confirmation as Ambassador to India. whichever occurs earlier.
Nearly a year ago, you assumed the duties of Attorney General under the most difficult circumstances. At that time you wisely set as your goals the rekindling of public confidence in the law and the rebuilding of morale within the Department of Justice. You offered then as your watchwords a verse from the Book of Micah, "To do justice and love mercy and walk humbly with thy God."
The impressive record you have compiled as Attorney General has in large measure brought fulfillment of those goals, adding new luster to your already distinguished career and further testifying to your superb leadership and unswerving devotion to the public good. You have truly earned the admiration of your colleagues in government and the thanks of your fellow citizens throughout the Nation.
It is with these high qualities in mind that I look forward to your continued service to this Administration and to our Nation as my Ambassador to India. I am wholly confident you will bring to your new responsibilities the same skills, energy and dedication to responsible government that you have demonstrated throughout your public life.
Betty joins me in wishing Dolly and you our best wishes for every continued happiness and success.

With my appreciation and warmest personal regards.

Sincerely,

JERRY FORD
[The Honorable William B. Saxbe, The Attorney General, Washington, D.C.]
Note: Attorney General Saxbe's letter of resignation, dated December 12, 1974, and released with the President's letter, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
I hereby submit my letter of resignation as Attorney General of the United States of America so that I may accept the new responsibility which you have assigned to me as United States Ambassador to the Republic of India, subject to confirmation by the Senate of the United States.
As we agreed, it is my intention to make my resignation effective upon my appointment as Ambassador, or, in the alternative, upon the appointment of my successor as Attorney General, whichever occurs earlier.
I want to take this opportunity to express to you, Mr. president, my appreciation for the opportunity to serve as Attorney General. A strong Department of Justice is vital to our country, and I can assure you that the officials of this Department will cooperate in every way with my successor in order that the interests of government and the people may best be served.
Respectfully,
WILLIAM B. SAXBE
[The President, The White House, Washington, D.C.]