Gerald R. Ford
December 17, 1974

Letter Accepting the Resignation of Roy L. Ash as Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Dear Roy:
Although I have known for some time of your plans to return to private life, nevertheless it is with deepest regret that I have received your letter and accept your resignation as Assistant to the President and Director of the Office of Management and Budget, effective on a date to be determined.
Throughout the past two years, you have served the Presidency and our Nation with high dedication and exceptional ability. You have had the tremendous task of keeping the Federal budget within reasonable proportions while at the same time enabling our government to meet its responsibilities to the American people. No one knows better than you how difficult a challenge this has been and continues to be.
With your assistance, however, I believe we have been able to shape effective, workable Federal budgets. I am particularly and personally grateful for your unhesitating support over the past four months and for your willingness to see through to completion our budget for 1976. I am confident it, too, will be responsive to the needs of our citizens and to their desire for fiscal restraint.
Your leadership and sound judgment will be sorely missed but it is some consolation to know we can call on your expertise again when the occasion arises. In the meantime, please know that Betty joins me in sending to Lila and you our warmest best wishes for every success and happiness in the future.

Sincerely,

JERRY FORD
[The Honorable Roy L. Ash, The White House, Washington, D.C.]
Note: Mr. Ash's letter of resignation, dated December 10, 1974, and released with the President's letter, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
In just four months, you have gone a long way toward restoring the faith of the American people in their system of government and confidence in its executive leadership. As our great country nears the finish of its second century and begins the third with a need for renewed inspiration and strength, it is fitting that it do so under the exemplary leadership you provide.
I am grateful for the opportunity to have been a part of the Administration you lead. As we discussed shortly after you took office, it has been my intention to serve two years in government, which time is now concluding. As a matter of fact, those two years are completed this very day. Thus, I am hereby submitting my formal resignation to take effect at your convenience.
Mr. President, you will have my continued support. With it goes my personal admiration for you, Mrs. Ford and your wonderful family.
Sincerely yours,
ROY L. ASH