Gerald R. Ford
December 18, 1974

Letter Accepting the Resignation of Tom C. Korologos as Deputy Assistant to the President.
Dear Tom:
It is not only with the deepest regret but also with a personal sense of loss that I accept your resignation as Deputy Assistant to the President, effective December 31, 1974, as you requested.
For more than three years, you have served as the President's representative in the Senate with brilliance, loyalty and the kind of political acumen that is the hallmark of the true Washington professional. I know from my own long experience in the Congress that your understanding of the complexities of our legislative system and your ability to work with and within that system is unsurpassed. On numerous occasions in recent months I have greatly valued your sound counsel and assistance on the difficult legislative issues which have come before us. You have given me your full, unhesitating support throughout the period of transition. For this and for your many, many contributions to my Administration and to our Nation you have my unqualified admiration and heartfelt gratitude.
I deeply appreciate your kind comments and expression of confidence as you prepare to depart the White House staff. I know that in the months and years ahead you too will be devoting your skills and energies to the future strength and prosperity of our Nation.
Betty joins me in extending to your family and to you our very best wishes for every future success and happiness.

Sincerely,

JERRY FORD
[Mr. Tom C. Korologos, The White House, Washington, D.C.]
Note: Mr. Korologos' letter of resignation, dated December 12, 1974, and released with the President's letter, had as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
After almost four years in the Congressional Relations office in the White House, personal considerations require that I submit my resignation as your Deputy Assistant for Legislative Affairs effective December 31, 1974.
I will always be grateful for your asking me to continue in my position the same day you were sworn in as President of the United States.
To serve as the President's representative in the Senate has been an incomparable experience which I shall always cherish; likewise, it has been a distinct privilege to serve on your White House staff. I shall remember fondly our personal relationship through the years when you were Minority Leader, Vice President and now as President. I also thank you for your many kindnesses, professionally and personally to me and my family.
I regret that I will not be able to share the many accomplishments that are ahead for you both domestically and internationally. I leave the White House, however, with the fullest confidence that you will achieve the goals you have set for our Nation. And, in your efforts, I wish you every success.
Warm best wishes to you and the First Lady.
Sincerely,
TOM C. KOROLOGOS
Deputy Assistant to the President
[The President, The White House, Washington, D.C.]