Gerald R. Ford
March 19, 1975

Letter Accepting the Resignation of William A. Carey, General Counsel of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Dear Mr. Carey:
It is with sincere gratitude for your devoted service to our Nation that I accept your resignation as General Counsel of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, effective on this date, as you requested.
For nearly three years, you have directed the office of the General Counsel with energy, skill and a strong sense of purpose. Under your leadership, landmark decisions have been reached which have broadened the economic opportunities of all Americans and have effectively enlisted the positive assistance of employers in identifying and correcting discriminatory employment systems. Your personal contributions in this regard have been significant, and you have my heartfelt gratitude.
Now as you depart, I hope you will always look back with a special sense of satisfaction on your years with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. You have established a record of accomplishment in which you can take pride, and you leave with my best wishes for every success and happiness in the years ahead.

Sincerely,
GERALD R. FORD

[The Honorable William A. Carey, General Counsel, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 1800 G Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20506]
Note: Mr. Carey's letter of resignation, dated March 17, 1975, read as follows:
My dear Mr. President:
I hereby offer my resignation as General Counsel of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission effective upon delivery of this letter to you.
It has been a privilege for me to serve in this capacity and to develop the legal staff of the Commission to its present size and to its present outstanding capabilities. At this time I have completed the responsibilities for recruiting a much enlarged staff of lawyers and establishing the policies and procedures to carry out the enforcement powers of the Commission on a broad scale.
The reason I am resigning now, and without delay, is to encourage immediate steps on the part of the Administration which will strengthen the composition of the Commission and increase the effectiveness of its work.
I wish to express my faith in the future of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission because of your strong desire to advance the purposes for which it was created.
Sincerely,
WILLIAM h. CAREY
General Counsel
[The Honorable Gerald R. Ford, The White House, Washington, D.C. 20500]