Gerald R. Ford
November 19, 1974

Letter Accepting Withdrawal of the Nomination of Daniel T. Kingsley To Be a Member of the Federal Power Commission.
Dear Dan:
I accept with deep regret your request that I not resubmit your name in nomination as a Commissioner of the Federal Power Commission. I very much appreciate the generous spirit which prompted your decision.
During your time in government, both at GSA and in the White House, you have been admired by your colleagues for the quality and diligence of your efforts. Your performance of difficult duties has earned great respect. I am hopeful that you will find it possible to serve the Administration in some other capacity so that we may continue to benefit from the contributions you can make to government.

With warm regards.

Sincerely,
GERALD R. FORD
Note: The letters, dated November 16, 1974, were released November 19. Mr. Kingsley's letter read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
I am deeply grateful for your continued support of my nomination to the Federal Power Commission. However, I believe the time has now come for me to respectfully request that you not resubmit this nomination. I make this request without any concern whatsoever that I would not be confirmed by the Senate, but with the knowledge that any confirmation hearings of one who has been associated with the White House for the last three years, however spotless his record may be, are subject to the natural controversy that is the unfortunate product of the political climate of the last two years. In my opinion, the importance to the country of your legislative program, the confirmation of your other outstanding nominees, and the general spirit of harmony and cooperation with the Congress does not allow the luxury of the possible controversy that might result from my confirmation hearings.
Mr. President, you have made a remarkable record under the most trying circumstances in your first one hundred days in office. I can assure you that as you continue to sick the objectives of lasting peace and a genuine prosperity at home, you will have my total and enthusiastic support.
Sincerely yours,
DANIEL T. KINGSLEY
Special Assistant to the President
[The President, The White House, Washington, D.C. 20500]