Gerald R. Ford
November 05, 1974

Letter Accepting the Resignation of Henry E. Petersen as Assistant Attorney General, Criminal Division.
Dear Mr. Petersen:
It is with deep regret and even deeper appreciation of your contributions to government that I accept your resignation as Assistant Attorney General, effective December 31, 1974. Your three decades at the Department of Justice represent the highest standards of both the Federal career service and appointive office. The record of those years is one in which you can take great pride--it is a record of unique achievement. Your ability, integrity, candor and good humor will be sorely missed but fondly remembered by those with whom you served. More importantly, you leave with the respect and admiration of all who were privileged to be your colleagues.
As you move on to private life, you have my best wishes for continued success and satisfaction.

Sincerely,

JERRY FORD
[The Honorable Henry E. Petersen, Assistant Attorney General, Criminal Division, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C. 20530]
Note: The President's letter, dated November 4, 1974, was released November 5. Mr. Petersen's letter of resignation, dated November 1, and released with the President's letter, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
After 27 years in the service of the Department of Justice I have decided to submit my resignation as Assistant Attorney General to take effect at the close of business on December 31, 1974.
Needless to say I reach this decision after considerable thought and not without some sense of regret. I am keenly aware that I have been most fortunate in having the opportunity to serve the Government of the United States. I recognize too that my duties with the Department of Justice have given me an excellent opportunity to observe at first hand the concern for fairness and due process of law which is the hallmark of the Government's pursuit of litigation. Clearly, it has been a privilege to practice law as an attorney for the Government.
To you Mr. President I want to express my gratitude for the honor which has been accorded to me and to extend my very best wishes for the success of your efforts in behalf of our country.
Sincerely,
HENRY E. PETERSEN
[Honorable Gerald R. Ford, President, The White House, Washington, D.C.]