Gerald R. Ford
November 17, 1975

Remarks at the Conclusion of the Economic Summit Meeting at Rambouillet, France.
Mr. President:
I wish to express my appreciation for the gracious hospitality of you and the French Government and the French people. My appreciation also goes to my colleagues for the spirit of good will, the spirit of friendship which they have demonstrated during this meeting. It has been a highly successful meeting in every respect.
In our sessions, we have covered the range of economic issues of concern to the industrialized world and challenging our democratic societies. These meetings have been rewarding in a number of important ways. They have deepened our understanding and appreciation of our mutual economic interdependence. They have enabled us to harmonize our views on key issues. And they have strengthened our determination to solve the problems that we confront. Finally, and most importantly, they reaffirmed our mutual confidence in a sustained and full recovery from the deepest recession since the 1930's.
Perhaps our most important accomplishment over the past several days has been our recognition that the objective of sustained, stable economic growth will be facilitated by our common efforts. As leaders of major democratic nations, we reached substantial agreement on a number of issues concerning monetary policy, trade, energy, and our relations with the developing world, as outlined in our joint declaration.
Over the past 3 days in this beautiful setting, we have found a new spirit-a spirit of cooperation and confidence stemming from a deeper understanding of our common destiny and our joint conviction that free peoples can master their future.
As a result of the work that we have started, the people of our countries can look forward to more jobs, less inflation, and a greater sense of economic security.
We conclude this conference with a sense of determination to carry forward this work which has been so promisingly begun.
Note: The President spoke at 3:12 p.m. at the City Hall.
Beginning November 15, 1975, meetings were held at the Chateau de Rambouillet, the French President's summer residence. Participants included President Valery Giscard d'Estaing of France, Chancellor. Helmut Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany, Prime Minister Aldo Moro of Italy, Prime Minister Takeo Miki of Japan, Prime Minister Harold Wilson of the United Kingdom, and President Ford. The foreign and finance ministers of each nation also took part in the discussions.
A declaration was issued following their final morning meeting on November 17. The text of the declaration is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 11, p. 1292).