Gerald R. Ford
October 31, 1976

Remarks in Hempstead, New York.
Thank you very much, Joe.
I can just look around this room and see nothing but quality in Nassau County. [Laughter] But let me say that I know from a few years in politics that a county organization with great leadership such as you have in Joe and with the kind of people that are here as officeholders and those that support the party--you give the people good government. And if we can win this election, and I am just as confident tonight as I have ever been in the old enthusiasm and momentum, then we hope to make the effort to try and build the Republican Party in all 50 States so that we can have a party in every State just like the fine party organization leadership and results that you have in Nassau County.
We have the right principles. There is no reason why we shouldn't win the control of the Congress, win the control of the House and Senate, because our principles are those that the American people believe in. So, what we have to do is win this election and then start building like you have built here in Nassau County.
And as I leave for Canton and Akron, where we are going to stay overnight, put on a big rally early in the morning, and then go to Columbus where they're going to have a big, big noontime rally in front of the State Capitol--and even my good friend Woody Hayes, I think, will be there to give us a little boost-and then we go on to Detroit for a big rally because we have to win Michigan.
And then Betty and I are going to land in Grand Rapids and they tell me they have a 2-hour parade all squared away there. At 7:30 Tuesday morning we're going to cast our ballots, and those are going to be two ballots that I will be glad to cast, because I think it will reflect what we want for America--peace, trust, and prosperity.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 9:30 p.m. at the Nassau County Veterans Memorial Coliseum restaurant. In his remarks, he referred to Joseph M. Margiotta, Nassau County Republican Party chairman, and Woody Hayes, head coach of the Ohio State University football team.