Gerald R. Ford
October 14, 1975

Statement on Receiving the Report of the Domestic Council Drug Abuse Task Force.
DURING the last 6 months the Domestic Council has conducted an intensive review of the drug abuse problem in the United States. I directed this review because I was concerned about reports of increasing availability and use of drugs. Specifically, I wanted to know the extent and nature of drug abuse in this country and the effectiveness of our current programs in responding to this serious problem.
The Domestic Council Drug Abuse Task Force has completed its review and has prepared a "White Paper on Drug Abuse" for my consideration. I am grateful to the Vice President, the members of the task force, and to the many others from inside and outside of government who offered advice and counsel in the preparation of this report.
Drug abuse is a problem of deep personal concern to me and one which requires a careful but forceful policy both at home and abroad. We have completed an important first step. Now we must continue the vital process of communication and analysis which has begun.
In order to assure prompt implementation of this report, I am directing each Federal agency with direct program responsibility to analyze and respond to the white paper within the next 60 days. I am also directing that the report be released to help refocus the current public dialog on drug abuse.
This Administration is firmly committed to improving the quality of life for all Americans. Clearly, drug abuse has no place in our society. I believe the white paper outlines in realistic terms the drug abuse problem this Nation faces and presents for my consideration comprehensive recommendations for ways in which the Federal Government, working with State and local governments and the private sector, can control drug abuse.
Note: The report is entitled "White Paper on Drug Abuse, September 1975--A Report to the President From the Domestic Council Drug Abuse Task Force" (Government Printing Office, 116 pp.).