Gerald R. Ford
September 19, 1975

Letter Accepting the Resignation of William J. Casey, President and Chairman of the Export-Import Bank of the United States.
Dear Bill:
I have your letter of September 13, and it is with deepest regret that I accept your resignation as President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States, effective on a date to be determined.
While I fully understand the personal considerations which have prompted your decision, I want you to know, as I indicated in our conversation last week, that I would much prefer to have you remain as Bank President. You have been an outstanding member of our team and, needless to say, we will greatly miss your loyal, dedicated services.
For nearly five years, as Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs and now as President and Chairman of the Export-Import Bank, you have brought to your responsibilities a valuable combination of exceptional economic skills and sound political judgment. I am, of course, particularly grateful for your assistance and counsel during the past thirteen months and hope you will always look back on this period of public service with personal pride and satisfaction in the contributions you have made to the well-being of our Nation.
As you return now to private life, Betty joins me in extending to Sophia and you our warmest good wishes for every success and happiness in the years ahead.

Sincerely,

JERRY FORD
[The Honorable William J. Casey, President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States, Washington, D.C. 20571]
Note: Mr. Casey's letter of resignation read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
This will confirm the request I made, in our discussion earlier this week, that I be relieved of my duties as Chairman of the Export-Import Bank at your earliest convenience.
I made this request with great regret. It has been a high honor and great privilege for me to serve in your Administration. As you know, I have a deep interest in what you are seeking to achieve for our country and great admiration for what you are doing. I will always remain eager to assist you in any way you wish.
I greatly appreciate your understanding of my feeling that I should give some attention at this time to business and financial interests which I have been away from for almost five years.
Respectfully yours,
WILLIAM J. CASEY
[The President, The White House, Washington, D.C.]