Calvin Coolidge
March 17, 1925

Excerpts of the President's News Conference
I haven't reached any final decision about the Attorney General. I have several inquiries here. Senator Curtis and Senator Robinson are coming down as a committee to wait on the President—I suppose to inquire whether there is any more business to submit to the Senate, and if not, what arrangements can be made for adjournment. I want to talk with them about this situation. I do not think, from my talks with Mr. Warren, I am convinced that he does not desire to take a recess appointment. He would take one if I insisted on it, but that is not his desire. [Stenographer's note: At this point there was quite noticeable commotion.]
Well, now, if the members of the conference do not care to stay and hear what I have to say, I do not know whether I want to continue the conference. That is hardly courteous to the President, to come in and immediately when I make a statement, rush out. [Stenographer's note: A member of the conference stated to the President that he did not think any discourtesy was intended, and the President continued.]
I think it is due to me when I make a statement that they [the members of the conference] wait to see what the statement is before they rush out. I am not imputing anything. I am conscious of the great courtesy of the members of the conference to me always. So I say no final decision has been made. I want to confer with the two Senators who are coming down and see what plans can be worked out. I do not think Mr. Warren wants to take a recess appointment. Perhaps he would take one if I—I do not know just how to phrase it—insisted that he perform this additional public service. He has already re-sponded very generously to our request. I do not know what to do about trying to get another appointee. I hesitate a good deal to subject anyone I might appoint to any such ordeal as confronted Mr. Warren. I do not know whether I can get other men who are willing to put themselves to such a hazard or not. I think perhaps I can, but, nevertheless, if they are willing to do it I hesitate to subject them to anything of this kind. So I will have to talk with the two Senators and see what I can find out about the situation.
Source: "The Talkative President: The Off-the-Record Press Conferences of Calvin Coolidge". eds. Howard H. Quint & Robert H. Ferrell. The University Massachusetts Press. 1964.