Calvin Coolidge
August 24, 1923

Excerpts of the President's News Conference
An inquiry about whether Mr. [Chauncey M.] Brush is to be Chairman of the Shipping Board. Well, of course, he isn't. Mr. Brush was an old time friend of mine that I knew in Boston when he was one of the officers, and I think later, the President of the Boston Elevated Railway. He dropped in yesterday morning to pay his respects and we chatted of old times and I inquired how he was getting along in his new project and, naturally, getting his opinion about some of my problems, particularly shipping, but it would be as impossible, I suppose, to get him to be Chairman of our Shipping Board as it would be as impossible to get one of our College Professors to be the head of one of our primary schools.
* * * * * * *
An inquiry about naval expenditures objected to by the Japanese Press. I wouldn't pay too much attention to an objection by a foreign newspaper. I haven't seen this and am just throwing out that hint as a general suggestion. If an objection should come to our State Department from the responsible authorities of Japan, of course, any such objection would be taken up, the matter discussed with their appropriate representatives, and an amicable conclusion would be reached. They have their papers over there that want to print things that, perhaps, may seem helpful to the interests of Japan, the same as we have papers here that, of course, print things that they consider will be helpful to the people of America. Sometimes they are on sound foundation and sometimes not. I haven't known of any objection on the part of Japanese papers or on the part of the Japanese Government. But, of course, the details of anything of that kind, you can get at the State Department. I am merely speaking on a few general observances.
* * * * * * *
An inquiry also about the Philippine situation and the protest of the Filipino Cabinet Officers, who resigned as the result of controversy with General Wood. There is only one position that the President could take in relation to that, and it is the position of supporting General Wood, as he is the authorized representative of the United States. That doesn't mean that in doing that I should want to take an unsympathetic view or act in an unsympathetic way against any of the repre-sentatives of the Filipino people, or desire to do anything but what would be helpful to them, but Governor Wood is there as the accredited representative of the United States and, of course, must have that support which is his due. As that support necessarily should take the form of undertaking to help him adjust his differences, of course, that should be afforded to him, but, of course, it must take the form of supporting him in things in which he is right and helping him in any other difficulties.
Source: "The Talkative President: The Off-the-Record Press Conferences of Calvin Coolidge". eds. Howard H. Quint & Robert H. Ferrell. The University Massachusetts Press. 1964.