Calvin Coolidge
August 08, 1924

Excerpts of the President's News Conference
I think that sometime after my notification I may go up to Plymouth. My boy lies there, and naturally my wife and I would like to go up there. My regret about that is that there isn't any convenient place in that vicinity for the members of the press. Within 10 or 12 miles is Woodstock, which is a most delightful place and well-known summer resort with a very fine hotel. It is a matter of 40 or 50 minutes run in an auto.
* * * * * * *
I haven't received any information from London other than what is in the press about the French and German compromise on the Ruhr situation. I don't know whether it is expected that the French will evacuate the Ruhr soon or not, though I had the impression that it was expected and that an agreement would be reached under which there would be an early evacuation.
I think there is to be a conference in Paris on the allocation of German reparations, and if that is the case we shall be represented there, because that is a matter that affects us. There are quite considerable claims against Germany, and the outcome will depend on the result of the findings of the [Mixed Claims] Commission, which is now at work on that. We have a claim for the Army of Occupation, which is roughly $255,000,000, and then there are the other claims arising out of damages that accrued just prior or after our going into the war. Those, when they were presented, were quite a large amount, but my understanding is that the findings of the Commission have reduced them very materially, so that I don't think it will run over half a billion and may be quite a considerable amount less than that.
PRESS: Represented officially or unofficially, Mr. President?
PRESIDENT: Of course we shall be officially represented. It is a matter to determine how the German reparations are to be allocated, which will mean that it will be determined there by what method, what time, and in what amounts we are to receive compensation to meet these claims that we have.
PRESS: Has a decision been reached as to who will represent the United States?
PRESIDENT: I think Mr. Kellogg would be sent over, if Mr. Herrick is not there. Perhaps Mr. Kellogg will assist Mr. Herrick. And of course Colonel Logan, who is very familiar with all these questions.
I haven't had any information at all about any suggestion about refunding the allied debts. Nothing has come to me about that.
Source: "The Talkative President: The Off-the-Record Press Conferences of Calvin Coolidge". eds. Howard H. Quint & Robert H. Ferrell. The University Massachusetts Press. 1964.