George Bush
April 20, 1990

Remarks on Presenting a Points of Light Award to the Birmingham-Southern College Conservancy and on Signing the National Recycling Month Proclamation in Birmingham, Alabama
The President. To Will Phillips and all the others involved in this magnificent project, my thanks. I am delighted to be here with the members of the Birmingham-Southern Conservancy. Let me now salute the students, the faculty, and staff of Birmingham-Southern who have worked together to create this important environmental initiative.
By enlisting elementary schools in neighborhood beautification efforts and working with the Cahaba River Society to involve inner-city youngsters in cleanup efforts, you are not only working to enhance our environment, you're also imparting your love for nature and concern for its well-being to the environment's future custodians, our youngest citizens. And you're helping them learn that we all have a role to play in solving some of our most pressing problems.
If we're to preserve our precious national heritage, each organization, business, individual in America must take direct and consequential action to protect our environment. So, it is my pleasure to present to you a letter designating the Birmingham-Southern Conservancy as a Point of Light.
Let me just hand this over to you, Will Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you very much.
The President. Among the many efforts this organization has undertaken, recycling is one of the finest. And I thought, therefore, it would be most fitting to have your organization and, indeed, this school be present for the signing of the proclamation designating April as National Recycling Month. And so, I'm delighted to do it. I can think of no more appropriate place to do it, inspired as I am by the work of all of you involved in this great conservation effort.
Thank you for letting me come, and now I will sign this one.
Note: The President spoke at 12:59 p.m. at the Birmingham-Southern College Recycling Center. Will Phillips was president of the conservancy. The proclamation is listed in Appendix E at the end of this volume.