Ulysses S. Grant
July 31, 1876

Special Message
To the Senate of the United States:
In response to the resolution of the Senate of July 20, 1876, calling upon the President to communicate to the Senate, if in his opinion not incompatible with the public interest, any information in regard to the slaughter of American citizens at Hamburg, S.C., I have the honor to submit the following inclosures, to wit:
No. 1. Letter of the 22d of July, 1876, from Governor D. H. Chamberlain, of South Carolina, to me.
No. 2. My reply thereto.
No. 3. Report of Hon. William Stone, attorney-general of South Carolina.
No. 4. Report of General H.W. Purvis, adjutant and inspector general of South Carolina.
No. 5. Copy of evidence taken before a coroner's jury investigating facts relating to the Hamburg massacre.
No. 6. Printed copy of statement by M. C. Butler, of South Carolina.
No. 7. Printed letter from the same to the editors of the Journal of Commerce.
No. 8. Copy of letter from Governor Chamberlain to the Hon. T. J. Robertson.
No. 9. An address to the American people by the colored citizens of Charleston, S.C.
No. 10. An address by a committee appointed at a convention of leading representatives of Columbia, S.C.
No. 11. Copy of letter of July 15, 1876, from the district attorney of Mississippi to the Attorney-General of the United States.
No. 12. Letter from same to same.
No. 13. Copy of report of a grand jury lately in session in Oxford, Miss.
These inclosures embrace all the information in my possession touching the late disgraceful and brutal slaughter of unoffending men at the town of Hamburg, S.C. My letter to Governor Chamberlain contains all the comments I wish to make on the subject. As allusion is made in that letter to the condition of other States, and particularly to Louisiana and Mississippi, I have added to the inclosures letters and testimony in regard to the lawless condition of a portion of the people of the latter State.
In regard to Louisiana affairs, murders and massacres of innocent men for opinion's sake or on account of color have been of too recent date and of too frequent occurrence to require recapitulation or testimony here. All are familiar with their horrible details, the only wonder being that so many justify them or apologize for them.
But recently a committee of the Senate of the United States visited the State of Mississippi to take testimony on the subject of frauds and violence in elections. Their report has not yet been made public, but I await its forthcoming with a feeling of confidence that it will fully sustain all that I have stated relating to fraud and violence in the State of Mississippi.
U. S. GRANT.