Harry S. Truman
April 15, 1949

Remarks to Members of the National Conference of Business Paper Editors.
THE PRESIDENT [replying to a request that he say a few words about the North Atlantic Pact and the St. Lawrence Seaway]. Well, Paul,1it seems to me that the North Atlantic Pact has been amply discussed and will be more thoroughly discussed in the Senate of the United States in a short time. There is very little I can add to what I have already said in the message to Congress on the North Atlantic Pact, but if you are interested, I will give you a mimeographed copy! [Laughter]
1 Paul Wooton, president of the National Conference of Business Paper Editors.
There has always been a tremendous amount of conversation about the St. Lawrence Waterway, or Seaway, or Power Project, or whatever you want to call it, and there will be a great deal more talk on that subject when I present the matter formally to the Congress.
And there is another project in which Canada and the United States are jointly interested, and that is the Bay of Fundy Project. The Canadians have come across out of their survey fund, but the United States Congress has been a little balky about getting that fund out. As soon as I can get that fund, why we will go to work on it.
You know, I have always been interested in the relationship between our northern neighbor and ourselves, because it is an ideal situation. It is one that has prevailed for more than a hundred years, ever since old Daniel Webster and Lord Ashburton had a meeting over here near Lafayette Square in the Ashburton House--which is still standing-to discuss the situation of the boundary between the United States and Canada from Lake Superior west. And old Lord Ashburton and old Dan came to the conclusion that that part of the country wasn't worth anything, anyway--and this was after they had a few good cocktails--and they took a ruler and ran it down from the middle of Lake Superior and said you take this and we will take this. And it has turned out to be a very satisfactory settlement ever since. So far as our relations are concerned, I think it is ideal.
One of the things I like to point to with pride is that while we, the United States, are considered the most powerful nation in the world at the present time, as a result of the last war, our neighbors on the north and to the south are not afraid of us. It is not necessary for us to keep a military force on either border to keep the peace. It is not necessary for either one of our neighbors to be in the least bit nervous about what we may want to do to them. They are most likely to think what can we do for them. And that is the way we want them to feel.
I appreciate the business magazines and editors and publishers wanting to come in to see the President of the United States. I think it has got to be a habit, hasn't it, Paul?
Mr. Wooton: Yes, Mr. President, you have been very kind to us.
THE PRESIDENT. Every year since I have been President of the United States, I have had it in mind to explain to some of you what the Budget of the United States stands for, but since this is a joint affair between Canada and the United States, maybe I had better not talk about the Budget of the United States at the present time. Some other time, maybe, I will discuss that with you, but I want to assure you that I appreciate your wanting to come in.
It is a pleasure for me to meet all of you again, and to meet all the members from Canada, and I hope that you will have a successful meeting and that your publications will continue to thrive and prosper. I have seen nearly every single one of them, except those from Canada--and I like to read the advertising! [Laughter]
Note: The President spoke in his office at the White House at 12:30 p.m. The conference is carried in the White House Official Reporter's records as the President's one hundred and seventy-seventh news conference.