Harry S. Truman
April 26, 1949

Statement by the President upon appointing William H. Davis as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Labor Relations Panel.
TODAY I have appointed William H. Davis of New York as chairman of the Atomic Energy Labor Relations Panel. Within a few days I expect to name the panel members who will serve with Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis was chairman of a special commission which recently made a report on atomic energy labor relations. He was chairman of the War Labor Board, and is an expert of wide experience in labor-management relations.
The establishment of the panel was recommended by the special commission after a 7 months' study of labor relations in atomic energy installations- I have studied the excellent report of the special commission, and agree with the Atomic Energy Commission that the recommendations in the report should be adopted as a sound means toward preventing and adjusting labor disputes in this important field.
I am confident that labor and management will seek settlement of disputes in atomic installations by voluntary procedures and mutual agreement, and that they will call upon the panel only as a last resort. Conscientious bargaining and the use of existing conciliation services must minimize the calls upon the panel, for it can be effective only if its help is seldom sought, and then only in the most difficult cases. It is not and must not be a substitute for collective bargaining.
The panel will settle only disputes affecting vital operations in atomic plants, impossible to adjust by collective bargaining and through existing conciliation services. The panel will operate on a part-time basis.
The panel plan is being adopted for a trial period of 2 to 3 years. It is subject to termination at the discretion of the Atomic Energy Commission.
Note: The Atomic Energy Labor Relations Panel had its origin in the "Report of the President's Commission on Labor Relations in the Atomic Energy Installations" (see Item 81). The report, which was made public by the President on April 18, 1949, recommended:
"That the Atomic Energy Commission establish a Labor Relations Panel of three impartial members appointed by the President from nominations submitted to him by the Commission.
"That the Panel be empowered to take jurisdiction of any management-labor dispute which collective bargaining and the normal processes of conciliation have failed to resolve and which threatens to interfere with an essential part of the atomic energy program."
On June 4, 1949, the President appointed Dr. Edwin E. Witte, and Mr. Aaron Horvitz to the Atomic Energy Labor Relations Panel.