Harry S. Truman
April 12, 1949

Remarks on the Floor of the Senate on the Fourth Anniversary of the Death of President Roosevelt.
Mr. President, Mr. Majority Leader, Mr. Minority Leader, Members of this distinguished legislative body--I think the legislative body which l have been closest to in my life:
I appreciate most highly your kindness and cordiality to me today. I was asked to come down and have lunch with the Senate, and I had lunch with the whole Senate, and it was a good lunch; and I had a chance to meet and talk to nearly every Senator in the Senate, a privilege which I very highly appreciate.
The reason for this invitation is the fact that in 1945 I was presiding over the Senate of the United States as Vice President. The Senate adjourned at 5 o'clock. I had an engagement to see the Speaker on a matter that was pending in both Houses in which the administration was interested. When I got to the Speaker's office, I didn't have a chance to talk to him but was instructed to return a call from the White House, which I did.
I was informed by Mr. Steve Early, who was at that time the President's Secretary, that he would like to see me at the White House at the main entrance as soon as I could get there. I had not much of an idea of what I would be faced with when I arrived. I was informed by Mrs. Roosevelt that the President had passed away, and I immediately asked her if there was anything I could do for the family. And she very kindly and courteously told me that there was nothing at that time, that it was not herself and her family that needed help but it was the former Vice President who needed help.
The Chief Justice was summoned, and eight and a half to nine minutes after seven o'clock on the afternoon of April 12, I was sworn in as President of the United States.
I want it very clearly understood that on my part there is no celebration on this day. It is a day of sadness for me, because we lost on this day 4 years ago Franklin D. Roosevelt, I think one of the greatest Presidents this country has ever had.
And it became necessary for me to assume a tremendous burden on that evening. I have tried my level best to carry that burden in the interests of all the people of the country, and I hope that when the history of the period is written that it will be said that the effort was not in vain.
I do thank the Senate most sincerely for their courtesy to me, for this pleasant luncheon which I have had, and I hope that this will not be the last time that I may have the privilege of meeting with you.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 2:10 p.m. In his opening words he referred to Senator Herbert R. O'Conor of Maryland, the presiding officer of the Senate, Senator Scott W. Lucas of Illinois, Majority Leader, and Senator Kenneth S. Wherry of Nebraska, Minority Leader.