Harry S. Truman
April 05, 1951

Statement by the President on the Voice of America.
THERE IS now pending before the Congress a request for funds to build a worldwide network of radio broadcasting facilities. These facilities are needed to help us win the battle for the minds and hearts of men. They would help us hold our own in the vital communications field in the event of war.
I understand that some Members of Congress advocate sharply reducing funds needed for these facilities. I find it hard to believe that this report could be true since it would constitute a complete reversal of the House Appropriation Subcommittee's action last summer when the entire broadcasting facilities plan was put before the committee.
In approving the first segment of the total plan at that time, the committee stated that: "The committee is firmly convinced of the absolute and immediate necessity of these appropriations which are so closely connected with our national defense and security." These facilities would help us hold our own in the vital communications field in the event of war.
While it had been expected to request funds for the worldwide network of radio facilities over a period of 3 fiscal years, I directed the State Department that it should request funds for the entire project immediately in order that it might be completed as soon as possible in the interest of national security.
The completion of this radio facilities expansion program is necessary to insure the delivery by radio of our campaign of truth to the people behind the Iron Curtain. The facilities program has been developed since the initiation of Soviet radio jamming which seriously interfered with American and other free world broadcasts. The program was worked out with leading electronics scientists in universities and private industries as well as in Government.
Note: For the appropriation for the Voice of America see the Departments of State, Justice, Commerce, and the Judiciary Appropriation Act, 1952, approved October 22, 1951 (65 Stat. 575).