Harry S. Truman
April 26, 1951

Proclamation 2924—Enlarging Hovenweep National Monument, Colorado and Utah

WhereasProclamation No. 1654 of March 2, 1923, established the Hovenweep National Monument on certain public lands in southwestern Colorado and southeastern Utah for the purpose of protecting and preserving four groups of ruins including structures of the finest prehistoric masonry to be found in the United States; and
Whereasit has been determined that the public lands described and set apart as the said Hovenweep National Monument do not include the lands containing one of the said groups of ruins known as the Hackberry Ruin; and
Whereasanother ruin, known as the Goodman Point Ruin, situated in the vicinity of the Hovenweep National Monument, has been found to be of significance comparable to, and suitable for preservation with, the ruins comprising the said Monument; and
Whereasit is deemed desirable in the public interest that the lands embracing the Hackberry Ruin and the Goodman Point Ruin be added to and reserved as parts of the Hovenweep national Monument:
Now, Therefore, I, Harry S. Truman,President of the United States of America, under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 2 of the act of June 8, 1906 (ch. 3060, 34 Stat. 225, 16 U.S.C. 431), do proclaim that, subject to valid existing rights and the provisions of existing withdrawals, the following-described tracts of land in Colorado are hereby added to and reserved as parts of the Hovenweep national Monument:
NEW MEXICO PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN
T. 36 N., R. 20 W'.,

Sec. 2, lot 3, and SE ¼ NW ¼.

T. 36 N., R. 17 W.,

Sec. 4, lot 2, and SW ¼ NE ¼.
Warning is hereby expressly given to all unauthorized persons not to appropriate, injure, destroy, or remove any feature of this monument and not to locate or settle upon any of the lands thereof.
The Director of the National Park Service, under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior, shall have the supervision, management, and control of the lands hereby added to this monument as provided in the act of Congress entitled "An Act To Establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes," approved August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535, 16 U.S.C. 1-3), and acts supplementary thereto or amendatory thereof.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
Doneat the City of Washington this 26th day of April, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and seventy-fifth.


HARRY S. TRUMAN
By the President:
DEAN ACHESON,

Secretary of State.