Harry S. Truman
April 15, 1952

Statement by the President Upon Signing the Treaty of Peace With Japan and Related Security Pacts
As President of the United States, it gives me great satisfaction to sign, and thus ratify today the Treaty of Peace with Japan, the Security Treaty with Australia and New Zealand, the Security Treaty with Japan, and the Mutual Defense Treaty with the Republic of the Philippines. The signing of these documents completes another in the series of steps being taken by free nations to bring peace and security to the Pacific.
When the United States and at least two more of the countries mentioned in Article 23 of the Treaty of Peace with Japan and the United States have deposited their ratifications, the historic ceremonies of restoring Japan to a position of independence, honor, and equality in the world community which began at San Francisco last September will have been brought to a conclusion. The related security and mutual defense treaties will become effective when their ratifications are either deposited or exchanged in accordance with their respective terms.
In signing these documents, I know that I express the essential unity and will of the American people for the earliest possible achievement of lasting peace and freedom with security. The Treaty of Peace with Japan and the related security and mutual defense treaties, when they go into effect, will bring that goal nearer to realization.
Note: The Treaty of Peace with Japan and the related security pacts were favorably considered by the Senate on March 20, 1952. The text of the treaties is printed in United States Treaties and Other International Agreements.
The Multilateral Treaty of Peace with Japan (3 UST 3169) and the Security Treaty between the United States and Japan (3 UST 3329) entered into force on April 28, 1952, and were proclaimed by the President on the same day. The Multilateral Security Treaty between Australia, New Zealand, and the United States (3 UST 3420) entered into force on April 29, 1952, and was proclaimed by the President on May 9, 1952. The Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the Republic of the Philippines (3 UST 3947) entered into force on August 27, 1952, and was proclaimed by the President on September 15, 1952.
See also Item 111.