Harry S. Truman
April 14, 1952

Remarks on Receiving Members of the Council of the Organization of American States.
Members of the Council:
It is a pleasure for me to meet with you and to extend to each one of you a personal greeting on this Pan American Day. Today we are celebrating the founding of the Organization of American States, which was established 62 years ago. This organization symbolizes the good neighborly relations and the peaceful cooperation that we have developed in our inter-American system.
Last year, on December 13, the new charter of the Organization came into effect. This was a forward step in the long history of this Organization. From now on, by virtue of its new charter, the Organization will have an even better opportunity to continue its important work of furthering the cooperation of our respective countries.
That cooperation was highlighted about a year ago, when this Government had the honor to act as host to the fourth meeting of foreign ministers. At that time the foreign ministers gave careful consideration to the common problems facing our hemisphere by reason of the aggressive policy of international communism. Acting in accordance with the finest inter-American traditions, they worked out a common set of policies regarding our regional action in regard to that danger.
Our governments emphasized at that time our determination to uphold our common objective of achieving a peaceful and cooperative world order. We expressed our firm resolve to strengthen our defenses only in order that our countries might continue to live in peace and devote themselves to promoting the cultural and economic welfare of their peoples. Our policy continues to be guided by that purpose today.
The Organization of American States is tangible evidence of our belief that cooperative effort among nations is essential to prevent aggression, to eliminate want, and to increase human liberty and happiness. In the achievement of these aims, the principles of mutual respect, of solidarity, and of belief in the dignity of man, upon which our inter-American system rests, are of profound importance. They express the essence of our common faith and form the basis of our common purpose.
This anniversary should be a day of rededication to the great spiritual values of our common heritage.
In that spirit I extend my best wishes to each of you and through you to the Organization of American States and to the peoples which it serves.
Note: The President spoke at 5 p.m. in the Blue Room in the White House.