Harry S. Truman
April 17, 1952

Executive Order 10346—Preparation by Federal Agencies of Civil Defense Emergency Plans
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, approved January 12, 1951 (Public Law 920, 81st Congress), and as President of the United States and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. In furtherance of national planning for the utilization of the personnel, materials, facilities, and services of the Federal departments and agencies which will be required in the event of a civil-defense emergency, each Federal department and agency shall, in consultation with the Federal Civil Defense Administration, prepare plans for providing its personnel, materials, facilities, and services pursuant to the provisions of section 302 of the said Federal Civil Defense Act during the existence of a civil-defense emergency. The plans of each department and agency shall take into consideration the essential military requirements of the Department of Defense with respect to such department or agency.
SEC. 2. In addition to the plans required by section 1 hereof, each Federal department and agency shall prepare plans for maintaining the continuity of its essential functions at the seat of Government and elsewhere during the existence of a civil-defense emergency. The personnel, materials, and facilities required for this purpose shall be exclusive of the personnel, materials, and facilities required for the execution of the plans prepared pursuant to section 1 of this order. In the preparation of the continuity plans required by this section, each department and agency shall consult with the Federal Civil Defense Administration with respect to the civil-defense aspects of its functions. In order to achieve uniformity of planning for the continuity of essential functions, the National Security Resources Board shall establish such standards and policies as it may from time to time deem desirable. That portion of the continuity plans of a department or agency which involves its functions at the seat of Government shall become effective upon approval by the President, and that portion, if any, which involves functions performed elsewhere shall become effective upon approval by the head of the department or agency concerned.
SEC. 3. The Federal Civil Defense Administrator shall assist the departments and agencies by indicating the types of personnel, materials, facilities, and services considered useful for civil-defense purposes in time of emergency; arrange for the use of such personnel, materials, facilities, and services as are not required for maintaining the continuity of the essential functions of the departments and agencies; and coordinate such arrangements with national, State, and local civil-defense plans.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

April 17, 1952