Harry S. Truman
August 08, 1946

Memorandum of Disapproval of Bill Relating to Construction of a Weather Bureau Station in Michigan.
[Released August 8, 1946. Dated August 7, 1946]
I HAVE WITHHELD my approval from S. 1198, "To authorize the Secretary of Commerce to sell certain property in the State of Michigan now occupied by the Weather Bureau and to acquire land in the State of Michigan for the erection of a Weather Bureau station."
Section 1 of the bill authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to sell the Weather Bureau station located on the campus of the Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science, and to convey such property to the said college by quitclaim deed, and to deposit the proceeds of such sales in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts. Section 2 authorizes and directs the Secretary of Commerce to acquire a site and cause to be erected thereon a suitable and commodious building for the use and accommodation of the Weather Bureau at East Lansing, Michigan, to replace the station authorized to be sold. Section 3 authorizes the appropriation, out of money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, of such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the bill.
The Weather Bureau building at East Lansing, Michigan, which was erected on the campus of the college during the year 1927, is not surplus to the needs of the Government, as the Weather Bureau continues to render an important weather service there to the public. At the time the building was constructed it cost approximately $38,000, exclusive of the cost of land which was donated by the State College of Agriculture and Applied Science. To sell the building to the college, acquire a site and erect a new building at the present time of scarcity of building materials, would be inimical to the interests of the Government, since it would result in considerable additional cost and contribute to the general scarcity of materials for the construction of housing for veterans.

For these reasons, I feel obliged to withhold my approval of this measure.
HARRY S. TRUMAN