Harry S. Truman
August 27, 1947

Statement by the President Upon Receiving Report of His Scientific Research Board.
THE CHAIRMAN of the President's Scientific Research Board, whom I directed last October to study the scientific research and development of this country, has made his first report to me.
Mr. Steelman's report, entitled "Science and Public Policy: A Program for the Nation," makes a comprehensive survey of the present position of the United States in the field of science. It outlines a broad program over the next 10 years that should greatly advance the Nation's position in scientific research and development. This program places a heavier emphasis upon basic research and upon medical research, indicates effective methods of increasing our supply of highly trained scientists, and suggests the goal by 1957 of a total expenditure by industry, the universities, and the Government of an amount equal to at least 1 percent of our national income.
The report confirms a belief previously expressed by me that the national welfare requires support by the Federal Government of basic research in universities and nonprofit research institutions, through creation by the Congress of a National Science Foundation. This Foundation should be set up from the outset in accordance with sound principles of administration and with the recognized democratic controls that should characterize all our public institutions.
The report is also concerned with strengthening and improving the Federal Government's own research and development program, which represents a substantial part of the national total of research. In order to assist in the coordinating of the Federal Government's scientific programs and in studying the special problems involved in research administration, I shall shortly name a permanent committee of Government officials most concerned with scientific research, as recommended in the report.
The position of world leadership this Nation occupies is due in large part to the fact that in a few generations we transferred our pioneering way of life into a modern industrial economy resting on the principle of scientific and human progress. We must constantly enlarge the boundaries of scientific knowledge in order to continue to provide the benefits of full production and full employment, and in order to protect our democracy from the dangers it faces in an uneasy world. The fact that only a thin trickle of scientific knowledge is today reaching us from other countries constitutes an emergency and a challenge. To meet this challenge, we must promote the rapid growth of basic research, the cross-fertilization of ideas among our scientists, and the maturing of a new generation of scientists who will think boldly and daringly.
We must concentrate on training young men and women who not only can handle technological devices, machinery and equipment, but who understand the laws by which these devices function. We must educate young people who will be able not only to apply known scientific principles to the peaceful development of new techniques in industry, agriculture, and medicine, but who will have the creative ability and the scientific training to discover new basic principles themselves.
These are matters that should be carefully considered by scientists, educators, industrialists, and legislators, as well as by private citizens. I hope this report will be read thoughtfully by all those who take seriously their responsibilities as Americans for the future growth, prosperity, and security of our country.
Note: The report, first in a series prepared by the President's Scientific Research Board, is dated August 27, 1947 (Government Printing Office, 73 pp.). The Board was established by Executive Order 9791 on October 17, 1946 (3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp., p. 578). For subsequent reports of the President's Scientific Research Board, see Items 194, 201, 206, 211.
The President established a permanent Committee on Scientific Research and Development on December 24 (see Item 241).