Harry S. Truman
December 14, 1945

Citation Accompanying the Distinguished Service Medal Awarded to Admiral Ernest J. King.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States takes pleasure in presenting the Gold Star in lieu of the Third Distinguished Service Medal to
FLEET ADMIRAL ERNEST J. KING, UNITED STATES NAVY
for service as set forth in the following
CITATION:
For exceptionally meritorious service to the Government of the United States in a duty of great responsibility as Commander-in-Chief of the United States Fleet from December 20, 1941, and concurrently as Chief of Naval Operations from March 18, 1942, to October 10, 1945. During the above periods, Fleet Admiral King, in his dual capacity, exercised complete military control of the naval forces of the United States Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard and directed all activities of these forces in conjunction with the U.S. Army and our Allies to bring victory to the United States. As the United States Naval Member of the joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combined Chiefs of Staff, he coordinated the naval strength of this country with all agencies of the United States and of the Allied Nations, and with exceptional vision, driving energy, and uncompromising devotion to duty, he fulfilled his tremendous responsibility of command and direction of the greatest naval force the world has ever seen and the simultaneous expansion of all naval facilities in the prosecution of the war. With extraordinary foresight, sound judgment, and brilliant strategic genius, he exercised a guiding influence in the Allied strategy of victory.
Analyzing with astute military acumen the multiple complexity of large-scale combined operations and the paramount importance of amphibious warfare, Fleet Admiral King exercised a guiding influence in the formation of all operational and logistic plans and achieved complete coordination between the U.S. Navy and all Allied military and naval forces.
His outstanding qualities of leadership throughout the greatest period of crisis in the history of our country were an inspiration to the forces under his command and to all associated with him.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The presentation was made by the President in a ceremony in the East Room at the White House.