Harry S. Truman
December 28, 1949

Statement by the President on the Occasion of the Independence of Indonesia.
IT IS with pleasure that I greet the people of a new sovereign state, the people of the Republic of the United States of Indonesia, and congratulate you and your great leader, President Sukarno, on the attainment of Indonesian independence.
The world has seen a nation grow in the vast archipelago of Indonesia. A new republic now has emerged from the chaos and disruption of war a new state is demonstrating that it will follow a course of peace and order so that all men in Indonesia may work fruitfully in your richly endowed islands to fulfill the promise of a new era.
The leaders of Indonesia have shown their statesmanship in reaching with the Netherlands unanimity of agreement at The Hague Conference and in supporting that agreement in the halls of government in Indonesia. Through wholehearted cooperation in bringing about this agreement, the leaders of the Indonesian and of the Dutch peoples have strengthened and contributed to the development of the United Nations. They have gained for the people of Indonesia sovereignty and for the people of the Netherlands good will and assurances of fair treatment.
The United States will welcome the Republic of the United States of Indonesia into the community of free nations and looks forward to Indonesia's admission to membership in the United Nations. Indonesia has already demonstrated that the goal of the new state will be true nationalism for Indonesia and that aggressive acts and efforts on the part of foreign dictatorships to subvert this newly won independence will be resisted with vigilance. Indonesia may count upon the sympathy and support of all who believe in democracy and the right of self-government.
Mr. H. Merle Cochran, who has served with distinction as the United States representative upon the United Nations Commission for Indonesia, has presented his credentials in Djakarta as the first American Ambassador to Indonesia. I know that he has many friends among you and that he will renew these friendships and make many more. As America's envoy to Indonesia, he brings you the good wishes and assurances of friendship of the American people. It will be his privilege to further the full and sympathetic understanding between the American and the Indonesian peoples.
I express the sentiments of the American people when I say that I am truly glad that the people of Indonesia have attained statehood by the way of peaceful and cooperative agreement with the Netherlands.