Harry S. Truman
December 18, 1952

Statement by the President on the Report of the Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation.
I HAVE today received the summary report and recommendations of the President's Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation.
This report is the product of 12 months of intensive work by the 15 professional and lay members of the Commission. When I appointed this Commission on December 29, 1951, I stated that its major task was to make a critical study of our total health requirements, both immediate and long-term, and to recommend courses of action to meet these needs. The Commission has done exactly that, and this impressive report is evidence of the energy and intelligence with which it went about its work.
On many occasions I have called attention to the fact that sincere efforts to bring better health to all our people have been retarded by partisan accusations. It is my belief that the members of this Commission, by setting aside any preconceived ideas they may have had in this field and by seeking only the basic facts, have opened the way to a fresh and constructive approach in meeting the health needs of the Nation. I am delighted to learn that with only comparatively minor exceptions the commissioners, who represent the divergent points of view of all segments of our society, are unanimous in their findings.
I shall study this report of the Commission with great interest. This material will, I am sure, prove invaluable in furthering positive efforts toward maintaining and improving our people's health.
I, of course, cannot say what the next administration will do in carrying on the work we have undertaken in the health field. It is my hope that careful consideration will be given to the Commission's findings and recommendations. This report deserves the attention of every American. It would be most unfortunate if the same emotionalism which has prevented open-minded study of major health proposals advanced during the past few years were to hinder the proper evaluation which this report merits.
In the interest of our national well-being, men of good will must continue the work of protecting and improving the health of all our people. The members and the staff of the President's Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation merit the gratitude of this country for their contribution to this most worthy cause.
Note: The Commission's report, entitled "Building America's Health," was printed in five volumes: Volume 1, "Findings and Recommendations" (80 pp.), Volume II, "America's Health Status, Needs and Resources" (320 pp.), Volume III, "America's Health Status, Needs and Resources; a Statistical Index" (299 pp.), Volume IV, "Financing a Health Program for America" (363 pp.), and Volume V, "The People Speak; Excerpts from Regional Public Hearings on Health" (521 pp.). Volume I, which the President received on that day, was published in 1952, and the remaining four volumes were published in 1953, by the Government Printing Office.
For the President's statement upon establishing the Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation, see 1951 volume, this series, Item 307.
For the President's message to Congress transmitting the first volume, see Item 369.