Harry S. Truman
December 14, 1946

Statement by the President Outlining the Housing Program for 1947.
IN MY recent statement on housing I made it dear that there would be no major modification in the objective of rapidly and adequately housing our veterans. At the same time I emphasized the great need to stimulate rental housing for veterans and pointed out that the overall program must be within the framework of the Government's announced policy of relaxing controls.
I am determined that a vigorous housing program will continue to be carried out in 1947.
The techniques we will use are those that will work today. I am interested in results and I am convinced that this 1947 program will produce results.
The main point of emphasis for 1947 is rental housing. Within the total number of homes to be built, it is of major importance that a maximum number of rental units be provided. We are planning financing and other aids that will encourage builders to produce units for rent.
In 1947 we will continue, at least for some months, the basic limitation order on nonresidential construction and the allocation of certain raw materials for the production of housing items. But these will be relaxed or dropped as rapidly as the situation permits. The priority rating system for builders and individuals is being discontinued.
We are also planning to carry through on certain special programs already underway-apprentice training; technical research; and above all steps to reduce permanently the cost of housing, most notably by aiding manufacturers of new materials and factory built homes.
THE PROGRAM
Restrictions on Non-Residential Construction
The completion of homes must continue on an increasing scale. The most important governmental order which enables us to accomplish this purpose is the order limiting non-residential construction. This must be continued. However, there is increasing need for schools and stores and other community facilities in connection with new housing developments, and for certain essential industrial and research projects. Fortunately, we can safely permit some increase in non-housing construction because of the greatly increased volume of building materials. As the supply improves, the order can be relaxed to allow more nonresidential construction.
Permission To Build Homes
During 1946, a large volume of dwelling units has been put under construction and the completion rate of these homes has been increasing from month to month. Nevertheless, the veterans' need remains extremely urgent and we recognize this by continuing to give veterans preference for every dwelling unit constructed for sale or rent.
However, from now on any person who wishes to build a home for his personal occupancy will be permitted to do so, subject to certain restrictions. This will increase the over-all housing supply and, in many instances, make additional homes available for veterans.
The construction of housing will be authorized by Federal permits. The major restrictions which will be imposed are:
1. The proposed dwelling must be designed for year-round occupancy.

2. The total floor area will be restricted.

3. In the case of rental housing projects, maximum rents, excluding charges for services, will be set at a project average not exceeding $80 per unit. Rentals will also be established for individual houses built for rental purposes.
The permit system will be simple. It will not be necessary to have sales prices set, or to meet the standards and inspection requirements of the present priority system.
Priorities
Priority ratings were necessary in 1946 while building materials were in critically short supply, but the increasing production of building materials coupled with the limitation on non-residential construction and a continued postponement of luxury type housing make the priority system no longer necessary. Outstanding priorities with their attendant obligations will be honored, but the issuance of any additional priorities to builders or manufacturers of homes will be discontinued as soon as the permit system gets into operation.
Allocation of Materials
The production of critical building materials will require the continued allocation of a few raw materials during the first quarter of 1947. If present high levels of production are maintained, it should be possible to discontinue raw materials allocation at that time.
Premium Payments
During 1946, premium payments have been successfully used for increasing the production of many building materials. However, present conditions require a critical review of each of these plans and the continuation of only those which will result in substantial benefits to housing.
Guaranteed Markets
The guaranteed market plans for industrial and prefabricated housing and for new types of materials will be continued. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation will continue to assist manufacturers of such housing and the producers of such materials by financial aid when it is warranted.
Surplus Property
For the past few months surplus property has been made available for housing purposes in increasing amounts. Building machinery and building materials and supplies will continue to go to home builders. The demolition program at old Army camps and other installations, another useful source of materials, will also go forward. During the next few months, many surplus buildings will be sold for use at other sites. I am also asking the War Assets Administrator to establish procedures that will facilitate the sale of land and buildings together.
Export Controls
Export controls on building materials will be continued until the supply situation warrants their discontinuance. For the present we must limit the quantity of critical materials that can be sent abroad.
Rental Housing
More family units must be made available for rent to veterans. They should not be compelled to buy in order to get shelter. To increase the proportion of rental units, we intend to use all available means--new construction, conversion and rehabilitation, and re-use. The great bulk of this task will fall upon private enterprise. We are aiding private enterprise by simplifying and reducing various priority controls and by the measures taken to increase availability of materials. We also plan a number of financial measures that will encourage the construction of rental housing.
Insured Mortgage Financing
To provide assurance of continued insured mortgage financing to builders who are planning rental housing, I am making available to the Federal Housing Administration the second billion dollars of Title VI insurance authorization provided for in the Patman Act. This is to be used primarily for rental housing, together with the largest possible share of the first billion dollars directly authorized by Congress. Congress will be asked to advance the termination date of Title VI insured financing authority at least for rental housing, for a period sufficient to accomplish this objective.
Assistance for Rental Projects
The qualified FHA personnel freed from duties involved in controls now being removed or relaxed, will be made available to help private sponsors plan rental projects and to expedite processing for insured financing commitments.
The FHA is simplifying procedures and broadening eligibility standards which will expand the field of its operation in rental housing. More types of rental housing will now be eligible for FHA financing.
To remove uncertainty over adequacy of insured financing commitments for rental projects, the FHA will develop a procedure for review and amendment of commitments issued in advance of construction.
To reduce monthly payments and to make possible lower rents, the FHA will extend the term of amortization in its Title VI rental housing commitments beyond the usual 28 years, the amount of extension to be appropriate for the project proposed.
To guard against the possibility of lesser earnings of housing projects after the emergency is met, the FHA will work out with concurrence of lending institutions a set of regulations permitting the adjusting of mortgage terms at subsequent periods in the life of the project.
The National Housing Agency will proceed at once to arrange regional and local meetings of the building industry, including lenders, to canvass rental needs and possibilities in each area, and to develop speedy construction programs.
New Legislation
Studies now under way with respect to possible further aids and incentives to rental housing by act of Congress, in addition to previous proposals such as were contained in the Wagner-Ellender-Taft bill, are to be concluded quickly. They will cover the field of cooperative and mutual housing enterprises, yield insurance, possible tax incentives, possible financing advantages and federally aided housing for low income groups.
Technical Research
Technical research in new building materials, and new methods of residential construction must be continued. The development of modern building codes must be encouraged. The Federal Government will make its services available to aid private industry and local governments in meeting these objectives.
Cost Reduction
Producing decent housing in quantity and at a cost consistent with reasonable ability of the mass of American families to pay, is a fundamental objective. All possible waste and ineffciency must be removed, including unnecessary governmental restrictions. All possible advantage through adoption and adaptation of new methods, techniques and materials must be utilized. Mass production, applying advantages of prefabrication of varied types and industrialized procedures, offers promise in this direction, and is to be encouraged and assisted in keeping with orderly transition of the whole economy in the remaining reconversion period.
Labor
With the housing program in full swing, there may be a serious shortage of manpower in 1947 in the building trades. Therefore, continued efforts will be made to enlarge the present apprentice program and to secure adequate skilled and semi-skilled labor for home construction.
All that I have said thus far deals with the Government's part in a vast housing program.
The success of the program however, depends not alone on the Federal Government but on State and local governments, industry, labor and financial institutions. In many communities these groups are already united through their Mayors Emergency Housing Committees and other organizations to sponsor and build homes for veterans. We, as a Nation, owe the veterans an opportunity to have homes. We will see that they get them.