Harry S. Truman
December 18, 1947

Statement by the President Announcing Appointment of Members of the National Labor-Management Panel.
I HAVE TODAY appointed 12 members of the National Labor-Management Panel--6 representatives of management and 6 representatives of labor, as required by section 205 of the Labor Management Relations Act. When requested by the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, the panel will "advise in the avoidance of industrial controversies and the manner in which mediation and voluntary adjustment shall be administered, particularly with reference to controversies affecting the general welfare of the country.
Appointment to public office, even on a part-time basis, calls for a considerable expenditure of time and energy, and a consequent sacrifice of private responsibilities and interests. On several occasions I have spoken of the difficulty of filling public posts with men of insight and broad experience. The willingness by these outstanding leaders of management and labor to serve on the National Labor-Management Panel should not only be of considerable assistance to Director Cyrus S. Ching of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, but should furnish an example to others to place themselves, when needed, at the service of their country.
The appointments and the terms of office are as follows:

From management: Term expires Dec. 18
James Black, President, Pacific Gas and

Electric Co 1948

Benjamin F. Fairless, President, U.S. Steel

Corporation 1950

Paul G. Hoffman, President, Studebaker

Corporation 1948

George M. Humphrey, President, M. A.

Hanna Co 1949

Lewis Lapham, President, American-Ha-

waiian SS Co 1949

Charles E. Wilson, President, General Elec-

tric Co 1950


From labor.............................................................................. Term expires Dec. 18
Harvey W. Brown, President, International

Machinists Union 1948

Clinton S. Golden, Chief of the Labor Divi-

sion of the American Mission for Aid to

Greece 1949

William Green, President, American Fed-

eration of Labor 1950

Allan S. Haywood, Vice President, Congress

of Industrial Organizations 1948

William L. Hutcheson, President, American

Federation of Labor Carpenters Union 1949

Philip Murray, President, Congress of Indus-

trial Organizations 1950