Harry S. Truman
December 05, 1946

Letter Accepting Resignation of J. D. Small as Civilian Production Administrator.
[Released December 5, 1946, Dated December 4, 1946]
My dear Jack:
The considerations set forth in your letter of December third have been carefully weighed, as well as your wishes expressed to me in personal conferences from time to time. Since the work to which I assigned you in October 1945 is well in hand, I accept your resignation as Administrator, Civilian Production Administration, effective at the close of business on December 6, 1946.
You have ably guided the destinies of the Civilian Production Administration through the critical postwar period, exercising with rare skill and discretion the broad grant of authority which was yours to speed the transition from war to a full peacetime production.
There are yet important problems to be solved through the machinery of your Agency but I do not feel it fair to urge you to remain when you have so long desired to return to private industry.
Now for several months we have been near to full-time employment, and we have reached a peak of production never before attained in time of peace. Your work, as originally assigned, therefore has been virtually completed.
In releasing you to return to private industry, I desire to tender you the thanks of the Nation which you have served with such fidelity and competence. There are men in business and in industry all over the country who will long remember with gratitude and appreciation the discretion which has inspired your decisions throughout the period of your administration.
As occasion demands, I shall wish to draw from your rich experience the counsel which you can give when problems in your field arise. Meanwhile, my best wishes for your continued happiness and success as you return to private pursuits.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[Honorable J. D. Small, Administrator, Civilian Production Administration, Washington 25, D.C.]
Note: Mr. Small served as Civilian Production Administrator from November 3, 1945, through December 6, 1946. His letter of resignation was released with the President's reply.