Harry S. Truman
February 12, 1951

Special Message to the Congress on the Famine in India.
To the Congress of the United States:
I recommend that the Congress provide assistance to the Republic of India to meet the food crisis which now confronts the people of that country.
The people of India are in desperate need of emergency assistance from this country in meeting their food problems.
A series of natural disasters--earthquakes, floods, droughts, and plagues of locusts-greatly reduced the 1950 grain crop in India. The result has been to impair the ability of India to feed the population in its major cities and in many rural areas.
The average Indian food consumption is little more than half of our own. Grain constitutes more than three-quarters of the Indian diet. India has a large and effective rationing system, through which a large portion of the Indian population receives some or all of its necessary food grain supplies.
One hundred and twenty-five million people are covered by the rationing system. Some 45,000,000 depend almost entirely upon their government ration for their food grain supplies. Already the Government of India has found it necessary to cut the standard grain ration from 12 ounces to 9 ounces a day and take other drastic measures to meet the growing distress. Grain reserves have reached a dangerously low point.
Total grain requirements for ration distribution this year are estimated by the Government of India at about 9,000,000 long tons or 336,000,000 bushels. To maintain the rationing system, even at a level below last year's, the Government of India finds that it will have to import close to 6,000,000 tons in 1951. India is procuring almost 4,000,000 tons of this total through the use of its own foreign exchange resources. This grain is to be purchased in Australia, Argentina, Burma and other countries. It includes about 1 1/2 million tons of grain which India is procuring for cash from this country and Canada in accordance with its quotas under the international Wheat Agreement.
Procurement of the remaining 2,000,000 tons--about 75,000,000 bushels--which India estimates it will need, presents a serious problem. This grain will have to come in large measure, if not entirely, from this country. The Government of India has requested the United States to make this amount available, with shipment to begin as soon as possible. India finds that it does not now have funds available to pay for this amount, and yet, if action is not taken, there may be a real danger of famine in India.
We cannot turn a deaf ear to India's appeal. Our friendship for the people of India and our traditional concern for human suffering impel us to take every reasonable step we can to alleviate mass hunger and distress. Furthermore, the needs of the people of India have a special claim upon our sympathies at this time.
India is the largest of the new nations of Asia which have attained independence since the end of World War II. Following the voluntary withdrawal of the British in 1947, the Indian people adopted a constitution and began their existence under it, as a sovereign democratic republic, on January 26, 1950, little more than a year ago. India's constitution, which is similar to our own, provides for universal suffrage and for the protection of its citizens in a way akin to our own Bill of Rights. The people of India are striving earnestly to establish representative government and democratic institutions as a unified and independent nation.
Like any nation which has just achieved independence, India is confronted with great difficulties--difficulties which have been aggravated by the crisis in Asia caused by the aggressive forces of communist imperialism. The present food crisis, if permitted to continue, would magnify these difficulties and threaten the stability of India.
It is important to the free world that the democratic institutions which are emerging in India be maintained and strengthened. With a population of almost 350,000,000 people, India has substantial mineral resources and important industries. Its continued stability is essential to the future of free institutions in Asia.
I recognize that there are important political differences between our Government and the Government of India with regard to the course of action which would most effectively curb aggression and establish peace in Asia. However, these differences should not blind us to the needs of the Indian people. These differences must not deflect us from our tradition of friendly aid to alleviate human suffering.
It is not our objective in foreign affairs to dominate other nations. Our objective is to strengthen the free nations through cooperation-free and voluntary cooperation based on a common devotion to freedom. Our actions have demonstrated our adherence to this objective throughout the world. It is natural that the Indian people should turn to us for aid in meeting the threat of famine that now confronts them. We should meet their appeal in the spirit which guides our relations with all free nations.
I am confident that the American people and their representatives in Congress will respond to this urgent call for help. Already, numerous voices from all over the country have urged the Government to send food; and a number of members of both parties in the Congress are strongly supporting this popular demand.
I have had the executive departments concerned make a careful study of our ability to meet the Indian request. We do not have an oversupply of food grains. Our current carryover of grain stocks is not excessive for a critical period like the present. Nevertheless, from a supply standpoint it is possible for us to make available up to 2,000,000 tons of grain without reaching the danger point. Inland transportation and other facilities to bring the grain to shipside will present some difficulties in light of other heavy demands. To provide sufficient ocean transportation to get the grain to India in time, it will be necessary to take some ships from our reserve fleet and recondition them. These ships, on their return voyages, can also help to relieve the shortage of shipping which now impedes the flow of scarce materials to this country.
The Indian Government finds that it is not now able to pay cash for the additional 2,000,000 tons. It is, however, prepared to pay, and will pay, the very substantial ocean freight charges. India has limited foreign exchange reserves, and will have a somewhat unfavorable balance of payments this year. It is planning to use the major portion of its reserves, beyond the necessary cover for its currency, on a long range economic development program. It is, of course, of major importance that India develop its resources and provide a better economic base for its citizens, many of whom live in dire poverty. Unless India can undertake such a program, its economic troubles will increase, the standard of living of its people will continue to decline, and there will be no end to its history of recurrent famine.
In view of these factors, and the pressing need for immediate assistance, it seems desirable to make a substantial portion of the requested grain available promptly on a grant basis, with India paying for the cost of transportation. This initial grant will avert the imminent danger and provide time to explore in greater detail the need for the balance of the Indian request and to determine the best way of supplying the amounts needed.
I therefore recommend that the Congress, at this time, authorize the full amount requested by the Indian Government, but that it appropriate funds now only for the first million tons, deferring the appropriation of funds for the balance until the situation has been further clarified.
If the Congress adopts this program, I propose that a mission be sent to India under the Economic Cooperation Administration to observe the distribution of the grain and to assist in carrying out the program. This mission would make an on-the-spot appraisal of the full extent of the Indian needs. It would examine other supply possibilities and the terms upon which additional grain should be supplied from the United States.
As in the case of other foreign aid programs, we would expect our representatives in India to be given every opportunity to observe the distribution of the grain and to be sure that the aid we are supplying is distributed fairly. We would also expect that the Indian people be kept informed through full and continuous publicity as to the source of the grain. Similarly, we would expect the Government of India to deposit in a special account local currency equivalent to the proceeds from the sale in India of the grain we supply on a grant basis. This account would be used for the development and improvement of the Indian economy.
As the Congress is aware, this is the practice we have followed in those countries which have received aid under the programs of the Economic Cooperation Administration. In the case of India, such counterpart funds would offer a splendid opportunity for the improvement of Indian agriculture, the development of important natural resources and industries, and other projects of benefit to the people of India. We would also expect the Government of India to do all it can to expand supplies and otherwise to lessen the danger from crop shortages in the future.
The purpose of this program is to meet the current emergency in India, and to stimulate measures to forestall such crises in the future. It does not constitute a precedent for continuing to provide food to India on a grant basis or for providing similar aid for other countries.
I strongly urge that the Congress take immediate steps to put this program into effect. It is within our means. Human lives depend upon our taking prompt action. Shipments must begin by April if this food is to reach India in time to meet the present emergency.
In this critical time in the affairs of the world, it is vital that the democratic nations show their concern for the well-being of men everywhere and their desire for a better life for mankind. But words alone are not sufficient. We must implement our words by deeds. We must counter the false promises of Communist imperialism with constructive action for human betterment. In this way, and in this way only, can we make human liberty secure against the forces which threaten it throughout the world today.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: See Item 124.