Harry S. Truman
February 01, 1950

Executive Order 10104—Defining Certain Vital Military and Naval Installations and Equipment as Requiring Protection Against the General Dissemination of Information Relative Thereto
WHEREAS section 795 of title 18 of the United States Code provides:
"(a) Whenever, in the interests of national defense, the President defines certain vital military and naval installations or equipment as requiring protection against the general dissemination of information relative thereto, it shall be unlawful to make any photograph, sketch, picture, drawing, map, or graphical representation of such vital military and naval installations or equipment without first obtaining permission of the commanding officer of the military or naval post, camp, or station, or naval vessels, military and naval aircraft, and any separate military or naval command concerned, or higher authority, and promptly submitting the product obtained to such commanding officer or higher authority for censorship or such other action as he may deem necessary.
"(b) Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.";
AND WHEREAS section 797 of title 18 of the United States Code provides:
"On and after thirty days from the date upon which the President defines any vital military or naval installation or equipment as being within the category contemplated under section 795 of this title, whoever reproduces, publishes, sells, or gives away any photograph, sketch, picture, drawing, map, or graphical representation of the vital military or naval installations or equipment so defined, without first obtaining permission of the commanding officer of the military or naval post, camp, or station concerned, or higher authority, unless such photograph, sketch, picture, drawing, map, or graphical representation has clearly indicated thereon that it has been censored by the proper military or naval authority, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both."
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the foregoing statutory provisions, and in the interests of national defense, I hereby define the following as vital military and naval installations or equipment requiring protection against the general dissemination of information relative thereto:
1. All military, naval, or air-force installations and equipment which are now classified, designated, or marked under the authority or at the direction of the President, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the navy, or the Secretary of the Air Force as "top secret", "secret", "confidential", or "restricted", and all military, naval, or air-force installations and equipment which may hereafter be so classified, designated, or marked with the approval or at the direction of the President, and located within:
(a) Any military, naval or air-force reservation, post, arsenal, proving ground range, mine field, camp, base, airfield, fort, yard, station, district, or area.
(b) Any defensive sea area heretofore established by Executive order and not subsequently discontinued by Executive order, and any defensive sea area hereafter established under authority of section 2152 of title 18 of the United States Code.
(c) Any airspace reservation heretofore or hereafter established under authority of section 4 of the Air Commerce Act of 1926 (44 Stat. 570; 49 U.S.C. 174) except the airspace reservation established by Executive Order No. 10092 of December 17, 1949.
(d) Any naval harbor closed to foreign vessels.
(e) Any area required for fleet purposes.
(f) Any commercial establishment engaged in the development or manufacture of classified military or naval arms, munitions equipment, designs, ships, aircraft, or vessels for the United States Army, Navy, or Air Force.
2. All military, naval, or air-force aircraft, weapons, ammunition, vehicles, ships, vessels, instruments, engines, manufacturing machinery, tools, devices, or any other equipment whatsoever, in the possession of the Army, Navy, or Air Force or in the course of experimentation, development, manufacture, or delivery for the Army, Navy, or Air Force which are now classified, designated, or marked under the authority or at the direction of the President, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the Navy, or the Secretary of the Air Force as "top secret", "secret", "confidential", or "restricted", and all such articles, materials, or equipment which may hereafter be so classified, designated, or marked with the approval or at the direction of the President.
3. All official military, naval, or air-force books, pamphlets, documents, reports, maps, charts, plans, designs, models, drawings, photographs, contracts, or specifications which are now marked under the authority or at the direction of the President, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the Navy, or the Secretary of the Air Force as "top secret", "secret", "confidential", or "restricted", and all such articles or equipment which may hereafter be so marked with the approval or at the direction of the President.
This order supersedes Executive Order No. 8381 of March 22, 1940, entitled "Defining Certain Vital Military and Naval Installations and Equipment".
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 1, 1950