Harry S. Truman
February 16, 1948

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Second Report on Assistance to Greece and Turkey.
To the Congress of the United States:
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Law 75 (80th Congress, 1st session, 61 Stat. 103), I submit herewith the second quarterly report on aid to Greece and Turkey, covering the period from the inception of the program to December 31, 1947.
Since the last report submitted November 7, 1947, Greece has been subjected to ever increasing pressure by the Communist minority, which, subservient to the foreign influences from which it draws support, would impose its will on the Greek people by force of arms. It is significant that the guerrilla warfare is directed not against the Greek Army but against the people of Greece. The deliberate and wanton destruction of Greek villages does not result from military engagements. It is determined and ruthless destruction intended to render people homeless and drive them from the soil; to force them into overcrowded urban centers where they become charges of an already overburdened state; and to create for them conditions of misery and hardship in the hope that this will make them susceptible to political agitation.
These bands which traffic in human misery and chaos are small, too small to claim any truly representative character. They total about 20,000, of which a large proportion are known to have been unwillingly impressed into the guerrilla ranks under threat of death to themselves and their families. There are members of the United States Congress who visited Greece during the past few months who know what horrible reprisals are taken against those unwilling to fight for the Communist guerrillas.
This policy is sapping the economic strength of Greece at the same time that the American Mission for Aid to Greece is seeking to build it up through reconstruction and economic assistance. This is, of course, the intent of the guerrillas, for a healthy Greece on the road to economic recovery would not be receptive to Communist ideology. Economic conditions in Greece have suffered from the continued military strife which has swelled the number of refugees in the north of Greece to over 420,000 and caused a greater share of the Greek national budget and of American aid funds to be spent on nonproductive undertakings. Only the most strenuous and determined efforts of the Greek Government and people will suffice to cope successfully with the present situation.
The American Mission is doing all in its power to assist, and its accomplishments have been considerable. Owing to the Communist obstruction it is increasingly clear, however, that economic recovery in Greece must await the establishment of internal security. Although economic programs most effective under the circumstances will continue to be actively prosecuted, the benefits from them can be fully realized only when the warfare against the guerrillas has been successfully concluded.
To aid the Greek Government in the prosecution of the warfare against the guerrillas, the American Mission at the close of the year transferred an additional $14,000,000 of aid funds from the economic to the military program, making a total allocation to the military of about $172,000,000. These additional funds will be used to support the formation of an additional 58 National Defense Corps battalions, making a total of 100 as requested by the Greek Government; these battalions will take over the task of protecting the villages of the provinces from which they are recruited, thereby freeing the Greek National Army to conduct a more offensive warfare. If the guerrilla menace should increase as a result of greater outside assistance, a new situation would be created which would have to be dealt with in the light of circumstances prevailing at that time.
While recent developments are adverse, in that they have lengthened the time necessary for Greece's ultimate recovery, the situation is not without encouragement. Greece is still a free country. The recent announcement of a "government" by the Communist guerrillas, who do not effectively control territory in which to exercise any of the functions of government, appears to have been an act of desperation and not of strength. The transparent device of declaring the "free government" has not materially changed the existing situation, except to reveal more clearly to the Greeks and to the world the true character of Greece's enemy. The United States Government has already made known its view that recognition of this group by other governments would have serious implications and would be clearly contrary to the principles of the United Nations Charter. The special United Nations Balkan Commission has passed a resolution that in its view any such recognition would constitute a threat to the peace.
I am pleased to be able to report that the Turkish aid program is proceeding in an orderly manner. Careful planning and procurement are now resulting in deliveries which can be expected to flow at a fairly uniform rate.
Continued economic assistance to Greece will be provided under the European Recovery Program, if that program is authorized by the Congress. The European Recovery Program will not provide, however, for any additional military assistance required for Greece and Turkey, which will, at the appropriate time, be sought from the Congress under Public Law 75.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The report is printed in House Document 534 (80th Cong., 2d sess.).