Harry S. Truman
February 24, 1950

Executive Order 10113—Delegating the Authority of the President to Prescribe Clothing Allowances, and Cash Allowances in Lieu Thereof, for Enlisted Men in the Armed Forces
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander in Chief of the armed forces, it is ordered as follows:
1. The Secretary of Defense with respect to enlisted men of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, the Naval Reserve, the Marine Corps Reserve, the National Guard, the Air National Guard, the National Guard of the United States, the Air National Guard of the United States, the Organized Reserve Corps, and the Air Force Reserve, and the Secretary of the Treasury with respect to enlisted men of the Coast Guard and the Coast Guard Reserve, are hereby authorized and directed, after appropriate consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, to perform the functions vested in the President by section 505 of the Career Compensation Act of 1949, approved October 12, 1949 (Public Law 351, 81st Congress), relative to prescribing the quantity and kind of clothing which shall be furnished annually to enlisted men of the aforesaid services and relative to prescribing the amount of the cash allowance to be paid to such enlisted men in any case in which clothing is not so furnished to them.
[Para. 1 amended by EO 12608 of Sept. 9, 1987, 52 FR 34617, 3 CFR, 1987 Comp., p. 245]
2. The quantity and kind of clothing, and any cash allowances in lieu thereof, prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury hereunder with respect to the Coast Guard and the Coast Guard Reserve shall, so far as practicable, be in conformity with those prescribed by the Secretary of Defense with respect to the Navy and Naval Reserve, respectively.
3. Existing regulations prescribing the quantity and kind of clothing furnished, and any cash allowances in lieu thereof, shall remain in effect until modified, revoked, or superseded by action taken pursuant to this order.
4. The term "enlisted men" as used in this order shall be deemed to apply to enlisted persons of either sex.
5. This order shall become effective on April 1, 1950, and on that date shall supersede Executive Order No. 10049, entitled "Delegating the Authority of the President to Prescribe Clothing Allowances, and Cash Allowances in Lieu Thereof, to Enlisted Men in the Armed Forces."