Harry S. Truman
February 21, 1947

Executive Order 9828—Transferring the Surplus Property Office of the Department of the Interior to the War Assets Administration
Whereas the War Assets Administrator, pursuant to the provisions of the Surplus Property Act of 1944, as amended, has by Regulation No. 1, as revised, effective February 23, 1947, designated the War Assets Administration as the disposal agency for all personal property located in the territories and possessions of the United States for which the Department of the Interior has heretofore been the disposal agency:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the Statutes of the United States, including Title I of the First War Powers Act, 1941 (55 Stat. 838), and as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered, in the interest of the internal management of the Government, as follows:
1. The Surplus Property Office of the Department of the Interior is hereby transferred to the War Assets Administration.
2. All records and funds (including all unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, and other available funds) of the Surplus Property Office of the Department of the Interior which are used primarily in the administration of the functions, powers, and duties of the Department of the Interior as a disposal agency under the Surplus Property Act, all property (including office equipment) purchased with such funds, all contracts and other valid obligations of such office relating primarily to the administration of such functions, powers, and duties, and all personnel of such office engaged primarily in the administration of such functions, powers, and duties, as the Secretary of the Interior and the War Assets Administrator shall jointly determine, shall be transferred to the War Assists Administration for use in connection with the exercise and performance of such functions, powers, and duties. Such measures and dispositions as may be determined by the Director of the Bureau of the budget to be necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of this paragraph shall be carried out in such manner as the Director of the Bureau of the Budget may direct and by such agencies as he may designate.
3. The Department of the Interior and the War Assets Administration shall supply and render, each to the other, materials, supplies, equipment, work, and services in accordance with section 7 of the Act of May 21, 1920, as amended (31 U. S. C. 686), to the extent and for such period after the effective date hereof as may be mutually agreeable to the Secretary of the Interior and the War Assets Administrator in order to facilitate the purposes of this order.
4. The War Assets Administrator may in his discretion terminate the office transferred by paragraph 1 hereof as a separate organizational entity within the War Assets Administration.
5. This order shall become effective February 23, 1947.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 21, 1947