Harry S. Truman
February 21, 1948

Address Upon Arrival at the Airport in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Governor Pinero, friends and fellow citizens:
I am very happy to visit Puerto Rico at last. As you know, I planned to come here last year, and had to give it up. Now I am making the trip I have anticipated with so much pleasure. For a brief time--almost too short a time, I am sorry to say--I can enjoy the beauty of your island, your rich cultural traditions, and your gracious hospitality, and I can see for myself the great progress you are making in improving the welfare of your people.
I am anxious, too, to talk with Governor Pinero, President of the Senate Munoz-Marin, and others of your able leaders. One of my great satisfactions was the nomination of my good friend Senor Pinero to be the Governor of Puerto Rico. I believe very strongly in local self-government, and the nomination of an island-born Governor was a significant step toward the increasing measure of self-government in Puerto Rico to which we are all committed.
I have been keenly interested in Puerto Rico for many years. I know of the many strides you have made and something about the problems you face and have overcome. In these efforts, the people of the continental United States and of Puerto Rico have been allied as partners. The Federal Government has supplied financial help. But your own efforts, especially during the past few years, have enlarged the economic opportunities of your people, have attracted new industries, and have improved your educational and health facilities.
This is a relationship which is mutually beneficial. It is the democratic way of collaboration between friendly peoples. It represents what the American people are trying to encourage in the world at large. It is a relationship in which we take pride because the services we perform for each other are directed toward raising the standards of living of all your people.
Your program of industrial and agricultural development, your inducements to agricultural enterprise, your program of training and placement for young men and women who wish to go to the mainland are all highly resourceful and give to the continental United States and to all the world an example of American democracy working effectively to meet and solve its problems.
I want to say to you parenthetically that we are very lucky to have at this time our able and efficient Secretary of the Interior, who is cooperating in all these things.
What has been accomplished so far is only a beginning. Cooperation between insular governments and the Federal Government can and should increase. It should have the form of friendly help from the continent. It should also be based on the capability of the people of Puerto Rico to help themselves. The progress made on the island in the past few years demonstrates beyond question your ability to do so.
Within this framework, the peoples of Puerto Rico and the mainland have a unique demonstration for the world. Differing languages and differing cultural backgrounds are not an obstacle to democratic unity. Such differences can provide the basis for a richer and stronger democracy. "Freedom" is a word which is found in every language. "Equality" means more than mere political emancipation. I have said to the Congress several times--and I repeat it here--that the Puerto Rican people should have the right to determine for themselves Puerto Rico's political relationship to the continental United States.
Too often we have had our attention directed to Puerto Rico's problems. We have heard all too little of your achievements. In less than half a century you have raised your wages and standard of living, have developed universal free schooling, highways, hospitals, utilities, and all the other institutions of modern society. More than that-today, under the leadership of Governor Pinero and President of the Senate Munoz-Marin--you are presenting an example to the world of modern democracy acting through your elected representatives to better your living conditions, to provide employment, education, health, and economic security for yourselves and your children.
In both Puerto Rico and the mainland, we Americans are seeking and finding the solution to these problems in the democratic, American way--by courage, imagination, cooperation. Imagination gives us the vision to see our problems clearly. Courage makes us bold--bold to act as the needs of the people require, cooperation keeps us working together so that our united strength overcomes all obstacles.
This is the democratic approach to the problem of national existence in the modern world. It is the effort of your people to use the instrument of government to better each person's way of life, which identifies Puerto Rico and its people with the continental United States.
We have a great common heritage. We are trying to solve similar problems in a similar way. My message to you today is one of good will, of pride in your achievements as a part of our national family, and of optimism for the future. As you go on to an ever increasing measure of participation in the guidance of your own destiny, I bring you the greetings and best wishes of all our fellow Americans, who share your problems and rejoice in your success.
Note: The President spoke at 10:30 a.m. In his opening words he referred to Jesus T. Pinero, Governor of Puerto Rico. Later he referred to Luis Munoz-Marin, President of the Puerto Rican Senate.