Harry S. Truman
January 04, 1946

Letter Accepting Resignation of Admiral Land as Chairman and Member, U.S. Maritime Commission, and as Administrator, War Shipping Administration.
Dear Admiral:
The time has come when it is incumbent upon me to acquiesce with the utmost reluctance in the wish to retire which you have so often expressed during the past few months. It is nevertheless with sincere regret that I accept your resignation as a Commissioner, United States Maritime Commission; Chairman, United States Maritime Commission; and Administrator, War Shipping Administration, effective at the close of business on January 15, 1946, in accordance with the terms of your letter of January second.
I can appreciate that after thirty-nine years in the Navy and nearly nine years on the United States Maritime Commission, all but one as Chairman, you are "war-weary", to quote your own phrase. That the job you undertook was a "headache" none will deny. But your lasting satisfaction will be the realization of your superb accomplishments.
The job which you faced was colossal: the provision of shipping space adequate to support military operations all over the face of the earth. That involved the construction under your leadership of more than fifty million deadweight tons of merchant shipping--an achievement without a parallel in maritime history. There were also collateral problems involving administration, personnel, conversion and a hundred other things, all of which went into the job of creating and maintaining the largest merchant fleet ever built by one nation.
You have indeed done your bit and I am glad to accord to you the thanks of the nation which you have served with such fidelity and efficiency. You are entitled to a rest and after that I want to see you again active in a field which will give scope to your superb talents.

With every good wish,

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: Vice Adm. Emory S. Land was appointed a member of the Maritime Commission by President Roosevelt on April 16, 1937, and as Chairman in 1938. He was appointed Administrator, War Shipping Administration, on February 2, 1942. His letter of resignation was released with the President's reply.