Harry S. Truman
January 26, 1950

Exchange of Messages With President Prasad of India.
ON THIS memorable day in India's history, I send my greetings and best wishes and those of the people of the United States to you, and through you to the people of the Union of India. The establishment of the sovereign independent republic of India within the Commonwealth represents a final step in India's political transition which closely parallels the political evolution of our own country. Because of our traditional sympathy with India, the people of the United States are particularly happy to send expressions of good will on this occasion.
The inauguration of India's new form of government and of its new Constitution, and the assumption of office by the first President, constitute an auspicious beginning of the second half of the Twentieth Century. May the future of the new republic, functioning under its democratic Constitution, be characterized by peace, prosperity and good fortune.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[His Excellency, The President of the Union of India, New Delhi]
Note: President Prasad's message follows:
On behalf of the people of the Republic of India, I desire to thank you, Mr. President, and through you the people of the United States of America for your greetings and wishes on this historic occasion. The inauguration of the Republic is a conspicuous landmark in the long and eventful history of our country in the struggle for our independence.
We have always had the sympathy and understanding of the people of the United States of America. During the last two years the relations between our two countries have become closer through exchange of Ambassadors and the visit of my Prime Minister last autumn to the United States.
As first President of the Republic of India it shall be my constant endeavor to uphold the traditions of democratic government and to foster, together with other like-minded nations, the ideals of peace and moral law that we have inherited from the Father of our Nation, Mahatma Gandhi. In this task, I am sure we can count on the cooperation of the Government and people of the United States, whose principles of individual liberty and the rule of law are reflected in the provisions of our own Constitution.
RAJ'ENDRA PRASAD