Harry S. Truman
January 09, 1953

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Volume One of the Report of the President's Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am transmitting herewith for the consideration of the Congress Volume One of the Report of the President's Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation. I recommend that this volume, and the four supplementary volumes to be made available shortly, receive the careful study of each Member of the Congress.
This report deals with one of the most valuable resources of our Nation--the health of our people. At a time when we are devoting our energies to strengthening our country in the world-wide struggle against communist aggression, we can ill afford to neglect the essential needs of our people in the protection and improvement of their health.
It was for this reason that I established the President's Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation some twelve months ago. At that time, I pointed out that bitter and partisan opposition to various proposals for the solution of our health problems had confused our people about the proper course of action on subjects vital to their welfare. I therefore appointed this Commission, composed of fifteen distinguished citizens, and asked them to make a fresh appraisal of our health resources and our health needs. I urged them to give us the benefit of their objective and constructive consideration of these problems which are so important in the daily life of every American.
The Commission members accepted this challenging assignment. Their findings and recommendations, after twelve months of intensive work in public hearings, panel discussions, and commission sessions, are now available in this volume.
Despite the wide divergence of viewpoints represented by its membership, the Commission is unanimous in its findings that there are great problems in the health field which demand immediate attention. It concluded that, among other things, we are in urgent need of programs to provide more physicians, dentists, nurses, and health technicians. We must have additional health facilities including medical schools, hospitals, and local public health units. And positive action must be taken to bring adequate health care within the financial means of all our people.
Throughout its report the Commission has stressed its belief that good health care must start at the grass roots--with the Federal Government taking the leadership, where necessary, in the promotion of good health rather than in extensive direct operation of health services. With this point in mind, the Commission has endorsed the principle of Federal grants-in-aid for State and local activities in the health field. The Commissioners also agreed that most of the people who now lack adequate health services find themselves in this position because of cost factors that are beyond the individual's control.
In the past, I have recommended that the problem of the high cost of health care be met by a national health insurance system. While the Commission majority felt that this approach required further study before coming to any final conclusions on its merits, it recommended immediate attention be given to a proposal for Federal grants-in-aid to State plans for comprehensive personal health services.
This latter proposal has the virtue of affording local and State groups the initial opportunity for the establishment of workable health services plans. It likewise may encourage the most effective use of private and public health facilities at the local level in providing essential health services. For these reasons it may well be desirable at this time to devote our efforts to the establishment of a program which will give the States a chance to bear the major responsibility in bringing the cost of health services within the means of all our people.
The members of the President's Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation, through their conscientious and tireless efforts over the past twelve months, have pointed the way to a fresh and constructive approach in meeting our problems in the all-important health field. It is my earnest hope that the Congress will give immediate consideration to the findings and recommendations of this Commission and thus continue our efforts to protect and improve the health of all the people of this Nation.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: See also the President's statement on receiving Volume One, Item 352. The titles and other bibliographic information relating to all of the volumes is given in the note to that item.