Harry S. Truman
January 05, 1953

Statement by the President on Report "Whom We Shall Welcome" by the Commission on Immigration and Naturalization
I HAVE personally extended my congratulations and my gratitude to members of the special Commission on Immigration and Naturalization for the excellent report which the Commission has submitted to me.
The report "Whom We Shall Welcome," reflects painstaking and scholarly effort of the highest order, and is a valuable and objective contribution to the subject of immigration and naturalization. It is based upon extensive hearings in various sections of the country, at which people of all religions, faiths, and all political persuasions urged drastic and far-reaching amendments to the present immigration and naturalization law. I am very pleased that the record of these hearings and the statements filed with the Commission have been preserved in printed form, available to the public.
It is to be regretted that persons who disagree with the findings of the Commission have resorted to personal vituperation and slander of its members and its Executive Director. Such politically motivated attacks have, unfortunately, become all too common in controversies over issues of great public importance. In this case, these attacks are particularly unwarranted and reprehensible.
This is a Commission of distinguished citizens, noted for their experience with the subject under inquiry--as churchmen, laymen, or public officials. They have freely given months of devoted, patriotic, and able service in the interest of finding solutions for some of the most important questions that affect our country. The nongovernmental members have served without compensation or other reward. Their study is impartial, nonpartisan, and thorough.
Their report ought to receive the most serious consideration on its merits. I believe that it will.
Note: The report, dated January 1, 1953, was published by the Government Printing Office (1952, 319 pp.).
See also Items 244, 373.