Harry S. Truman
January 30, 1946

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Financial Agreement With the United Kingdom.
To the Congress of the United States:
The establishment of a permanent state of peace and prosperity is not a simple matter. The creation and maintenance of conditions under which nations can be prosperous and remain peaceful involves a series of highly complex and difficult problems. If we are to reach this greatly desired goal, we must be prepared at all times to face the issues that will constantly present themselves and we must be determined to solve them. If peace is to be permanent, we must never relax our efforts to make it so.
In his message to the Congress recommending the approval of the Bretton Woods Agreements, President Roosevelt called these proposals "the cornerstone for international economic cooperation." By enacting the Bretton Woods Agreements Act, the 79th Congress laid this cornerstone for the construction of an orderly economic peace. The Congress took many other steps during the same session which enlarged the structure, and its achievements in this field are just cause for pride. Among the most important of these other steps were the ratification and implementation of the treaty establishing the United Nations Organization, the enactment of legislation to support the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and to carry on the operations of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, the extension in a broader form of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, and the expansion of the Export-Import Bank. These steps will take us a long way on the road to world-wide security and prosperity. They should not make us blind, however, to the job that has not been done--to the work that lies ahead.
In approving the establishment of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Congress specifically expressed its belief that additional measures for international economic cooperation would be necessary to render most effective the operations of the Fund and Bank. In the Bretton Woods Agreements Act the Congress declared it to be the policy of the United States to seek to bring about further international agreement and cooperation along these lines.
The International Monetary Fund Agreement was drafted and the Bretton Woods Agreements Act was enacted during the war. Both recognized that the financial condition of some countries resulting from the war might make it impossible for them to apply at once the fundamental rule of non-discrimination in their monetary and financial transactions. Therefore, provision was made for a transition period which might postpone as long as five years the complete application of this fundamental rule.
Now in time of peace as we rapidly proceed with the organization of the International Monetary fund we find that the fears which were responsible for this period of grace are verified by the facts. The most important of these facts is that the United Kingdom as a result of the war must continue for a long period many of its emergency wartime financial controls unless it obtains additional working capital. It is apparent that, in the case of a principal member of the International Monetary Fund, we can ill afford to wait for the period permitted by the Bretton Woods Agreements for the removal of these hindrances to the financial and commercial relationships between nations. Now is the time to establish postwar monetary and financial policies of the United Nations. Now is the time to take action to enable the United Kingdom to move with us toward the prompt abolition of these restrictions.
For these reasons, the next order of international business before the Congress should be our financial relations with the United Kingdom. The problems involved, which are severe but not insoluble, are direct consequences of the war. They are matters of great urgency and I believe that the financial Agreement which I am transmitting herewith furnishes a real basis for their solution. It is my earnest hope that the Congress will implement the financial Agreement as speedily as is consistent with careful legislative consideration.
It is not too much to say that the Agreement now transmitted will set the course of American and British economic relations for many years to come. In so doing it will have a decisive influence on the international trade of the whole world. Those who represented the United States in these discussions and those who represented the United Kingdom were fully aware of the fundamental nature of the problems before them. After long and careful consideration they agreed upon the arrangements which in my opinion will provide a solid foundation for the successful conduct of our economic relations with each other and with the world.
The Financial Agreement will by its terms come into operation only after the Congress has made available the funds necessary to extend to the United Kingdom the line of credit of $3.75 billion in accordance with the terms set forth in the Agreement. Britain needs this credit and she needs it now. It will assist her to meet the expected deficit in her balance of payments during the next six years. It will enable her to buy from the world the supplies of food and raw materials which are essential to the life and work of the British people. At the same time it will keep open a market for those surpluses of the United States which are customarily exported to the United Kingdom. These are the important short-term purposes of the credit.
But the Financial Agreement is much more than a credit. Let me repeat, its most important purpose from our point of view is to cause the removal of emergency controls exercised by the United Kingdom over its international transactions far more speedily than is required by the Bretton Woods Agreements. The Financial Agreement will enable the United Kingdom, through the prompt relaxation of exchange restrictions and discriminations, to move side by side with the United States toward the common goal of expanded world trade which means expanded production, consumption and employment and rising standards of living everywhere.
The line of credit which will be extended to the United Kingdom under the Agreement may be drawn upon until the end of 1951. At that time the United Kingdom will be obligated to begin repayment of the principal with interest and those payments will continue over a period of 50 years. These terms are neither unusual nor difficult to understand. There is one new concept, however, embodied in the terms of the credit. We have recognized that conditions may exist temporarily during such a long period of time which would make the payment of interest on such a large amount difficult if not impossible. Accordingly, provision has been made for the waiver of interest by the United States Government after a certification by the International Monetary Fund as to the facts regarding the balance of payments position of the United Kingdom. It is not to our advantage to press for payment of interest when payment is impossible and thus force default and a crumbling of international economic relations.
The financial assistance which the United Kingdom would receive under the Agreement has made it possible for the two governments to agree on a specific course of action which in a short period of time will result in the removal of emergency controls over foreign exchange and discriminatory import restrictions and the reestablishment of peacetime practices designed to promote the recovery of world trade. Britain has agreed to abolish the so-called "sterling area dollar pool." She has agreed to give up most of her rights during the transition period provided for in the International Monetary Fund Agreement and thus to abandon controls over foreign exchange which she would otherwise be permitted by the terms of that Agreement to continue for a considerable period of time. In addition to the direct benefits which will flow from this stimulus to Anglo-American trade there will be the added benefits derived from the ability of other nations to relax their restrictions once the United Kingdom has led the way.
Another troublesome financial problem which has been fully and frankly discussed by the two nations is that of the sterling liabilities of Great Britain which have resulted from her large expenditures abroad during the war. In the Financial Agreement the British Government has undertaken to adjust and settle these obligations out of resources other than the American credit and has outlined its intentions with respect to their settlement. Our concern in this connection is two-fold. In the first place we want other countries which are in a position to do so to grant assistance to the United Kingdom within their means. Those which hold large sterling balances can do so by scaling them down. In the second place we want to be certain that the liquidation of these balances will not discriminate against American trade. The Financial Agreement contains a specific undertaking by the Government of the United Kingdom that no such discrimination shall result from these settlements.
The Financial Agreement also makes it possible for the United Kingdom to give wholehearted support to the Proposals for Expansion of World Trade and Employment which the United States has recently put forward as a basis for international discussions by the United Nations. In the Joint Statement on Commercial Policy published at the same time as the financial Agreement, the United Kingdom has undertaken to support these Proposals and to use its best endeavors in cooperation with the United States to bring to a successful conclusion international discussions based upon them.
The implementation of the Financial Agreement will be a great contribution to the establishment of a permanent state of peace and prosperity. We are all aware of the dangers inherent in unchecked economic rivalry and economic warfare. These dangers can be eliminated by the firm resolution of this nation and the United Kingdom to carry forward the work which has been so well begun.
The Financial Agreement transmitted herewith means that instead of economic controversy between the two countries, the wise rules of the Bretton Woods Agreements will be fully effective much sooner than we believed possible when the Congress enacted the Bretton Woods Agreements Act. I urge that Congress act on the Financial Agreement promptly.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The text of the Financial Agreement is published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 13, p. 907), and in the U.S. Statutes at Large (60 Stat. 1841).
For the President's statement upon signing bill implementing the Agreement, see Item 169.