Harry S. Truman
July 26, 1946

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting a Recommendation of the International Labor Organization.
To the Congress of the United States:
The Twenty-Seventh Conference of the International Labor Organization was held in Paris, France, from October 15 to November 5, 1945 Representatives of governments, employers, and workers participated in its deliberations. The United States was one of the forty-eight Member Nations represented at the Conference.
The Conference adopted, on November 5, 1945, Recommendation (No. 74) Concerning Minimum Standards of Social Policy in Dependent Territories (Supplementary Provisions). One hundred votes were cast in favor of adoption, and none were recorded in opposition.
This Recommendation sets forth minimum standards found desirable by the Conference for application in dependent territories to supplement the standards contained in Recommendation (No. 70) Concerning Minimum Standards of Social Policy in Dependent Territories which was adopted on May 12, 1944, by the Twenty-Sixth Conference held in Philadelphia and which was transmitted to the Congress of the United States on August 22, 1944.
In accordance with the Constitution of the International Labor Organization which provides that Recommendations adopted by the Conference shall be brought before the competent authority or authorities for the enactment of legislation or other action, I herewith transmit to the Congress the authentic text of this Recommendation (No. 74). I believe that the Congress will find the provisions of this Recommendation helpful in its consideration of problems of social policy in those territories and possessions of the United States to which it may be applicable.
I am also bringing this Recommendation to the attention of the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, and the Secretary of the Interior in order that they may transmit it for suitable action by the appropriate authority or authorities in those territories and possessions of the United States for which they respectively are administratively responsible.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The text of the recommendation is printed in House Document 749 (79th Cong., 2d sess.).