Harry S. Truman
July 15, 1948

Statement by the President Upon the Death of General Pershing.
IT BECOMES my sad duty to announce that John J. Pershing, General of the Armies of the United States, a great American, died this morning at Waiter Reed General Hospital in Washington.
Embodied in General Pershing's character were all those soldierly qualities that are essential to a great captain: brilliant leadership, steadfast courage, tireless energy, unswerving loyalty, and constant devotion to duty. He had a genius for organization, as everyone who served under him will bear witness. In World War I, he led the greatest army this country had, up to that time, been called upon to assemble.
The sorrow at his passing will not be confined to his own country. Friend and foe alike have publicly paid tribute to his loyalty to duty, his ability to lead and inspire, his wisdom and courage under extreme stress. In peace, no less 'than in war, he retained the dignity and modest bearing characteristic of the true soldier.
General Pershing's service in France called not only for the highest quality of military talent but also for the exercise of statesmanship of the highest order. His success in retaining the essential American character of our Army abroad is known to history. He believed in the fundamental institutions of democracy. He saw earlier and more clearly than many of his contemporaries the development of the fast-moving events which culminated in World War II.
The Government awarded General Pershing its highest military rank. To him his fellow countrymen accord unlimited gratitude and affection for selfless service in behalf of our national ideals.
The Nation will ever hold him in grateful remembrance.
Note: In addition to the foregoing statement, the President issued Proclamation 2797 (3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp. p. 213), which provided that as a mark of respect to the memory of General Pershing the flag of the United States should be flown at half-mast on all public buildings, forts, military posts, and naval stations and vessels until after the funeral had taken place.