Harry S. Truman
July 02, 1947

Special Message to the Congress on the Control and Administration of the United Nations Headquarters in New York City.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith for the consideration of the Congress an agreement between the United States and the United Nations concerning the control and administration of the Headquarters of the United Nations in the City of New York. I also enclose a letter from the Secretary of State regarding this Agreement.
As you will recall, on December 10 and 11, 1945 the Congress by concurrent resolution unanimously invited the United Nations to locate its permanent headquarters in the United States. After long and careful study, the General Assembly of the United Nations decided during its session last winter to make its permanent home in New York City.
The United States has been signally honored in the location of the headquarters of the United Nations within our country. Naturally the United States wishes to make all appropriate arrangements so that the Organization can fully and effectively perform the functions for which it was created and upon the successful accomplishment of which so much depends.
This Agreement is the product of months of negotiations between representatives of this Government and the United Nations. Representatives of the City and State of New York participated in these negotiations. The Agreement carefully balances the interests of the United States as a Member of the United Nations and the interests of the United Nations as an international organization.
I urge the Congress to give early consideration to the enclosed Agreement and to authorize this Government by joint resolution, to give effect to its provisions.
When the General Assembly of the United Nations meets in New York City this fall it would be most appropriate if this Government were ready for its part to bring the Agreement into effect.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: On August 4 the President approved a joint resolution authorizing him to bring into effect an agreement between the United States and the United Nations for the purpose of establishing the permanent headquarters of the United Nations in the United States (61 Stat. 756). The agreement became effective November 21, 1947, through an exchange of notes on that date between Warren R. Austin, Permanent Representative of the United States at the United Nations, and Trygve Lie, Secretary General of the United Nations.
Secretary Marshall's letter, dated June 30, 1947, is printed in House Document 376 (80th Cong., 1st sess.).