Harry S. Truman
July 02, 1948

Proclamation 2795—Display of the Flag at Fort McHenry National Monument and Historic Shrine

Whereasthe joint resolution of Congress of June 22, 1942, entitled "Joint Resolution to Codify and Emphasize Existing Rules and Customs Pertaining to the Display and Use of the Flag of the United States of America," as amended by the joint resolution of December 22, 1942, 56 Stat. 1074, contains the following provisions:
SEC. 2. (a) It is the universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to sunset on buildings and on stationary flagstaffs in the open. However, the flag may be displayed at night upon special occasions when it is desired to produce a patriotic effect.
* * * * *
SEC. 8. Any rule or custom pertaining to the display of the flag of the United States of America, set forth herein, may be altered, modified, or repealed, or additional rules with respect thereto may be prescribed, by the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, whenever he deems it to be appropriate or desirable; and any such alteration or additional rule shall be set forth in a proclamation.
And
WhereasFrancis Scott Key, after having anxiously watched from afar the bombardment of Fort McHenry throughout the night of September 13, 1814, saw his country's flag still flying in the early morning of the following day; and
Whereasthis stirring evidence of the failure of the prolonged attack inspired him to write the Star-Spangled Banner, our national anthem:
Now, Therefore, I, Harry S. Truman,President of the United States of America and Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, do hereby proclaim that, as a perpetual symbol of our patriotism, the flag of the United States shall hereafter be displayed at Fort McHenry National Monument and Historic Shrine at all times during the day and night, except when the weather is inclement.
The rules and customs pertaining to the display of the flag as set forth in the said joint resolution are modified accordingly.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
Doneat the City of Washington this 2nd day of July in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and seventy-second.


HARRY S. TRUMAN
By the President:
G. C. MARSHALL,

Secretary of State.