Harry S. Truman
July 06, 1945

Executive Order 9587—Amending Executive Order 8588 Entitled "Prescribing Regulations Governing the Payment of Expenses of Transportation of Household Goods and Personal Effects of Certain Civilian Officers and Employees of the United States" and Prescribing Regulations Governing the Payment of Expenses of Transportation of the Immediate Family of Civilian Officers and Employees of the Government
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by the act of October 10, 1940, 54 Stat. 1105, and section 201 (a) of the Independent Offices Appropriation Act, 1946, approved May 3, 1945, it is hereby ordered as follows:
PART I
Sections 5 and 12 of Executive Order 8588 of November 7, 1940, as amended by sections 1 and 4 of Executive Order 9122 of April 6, 1942, are hereby further amended to read as follows:
"SECTION 5. Means of shipment. For the duration of the present war and six months thereafter transportation services, including services specified in sections 3 and 4 hereof, may be procured by the agency concerned, with due regard to means ordinarily required for such transportation, from any available common carrier: Provided, however, That the employee may have his effects moved by some means other than that selected by the Government, by paying the difference between the charges under the means selected by the Government and the charges by the preferred means: And provided further, That when the head of the department or agency determines it to be in the interest of the Government, he may specifically authorize the shipment by express of articles required for immediate use at the new official station (such as professional books, wearing apparel, bedding or kitchen utensils, but not furniture or jewelry), which shall in no case exceed a weight of 500 pounds for employees having dependents living with them or 250 pounds for employees having no dependents living with them."
"SECTION 12. Time Limit. All shipments allowable under these regulations shall begin within one year of the effective date of the transfer of the employee unless an extension is specifically granted by the head of the department ore establishment. Such an extension shall be approved by the head of the department or establishment within the one-year period during which shipment would otherwise begin and shall in no case be for a period exceeding two years from the effective date of the transfer, except that, for employees who enter upon active military, naval, or Coast Guard duty at any time prior to the expiration of the period within which transportation of their effects is authorized and who are furloughed for the duration of such duty, the extension may be made effective until a date not more than six months following the date of termination of the furlough."
PART II
The following regulations are hereby prescribed to govern the payment of expenses of transportation, authorized by section 201 (a) of the Independent Offices Appropriation Act, 1946, of the immediate family of any civilian officer or employee of the executive departments and independent establishments who is transferred from one official station to another for permanent duty, when authorized by the head of the department or establishment concerned in the order directing such transfer:
SECTION 1. The term immediate family shall mean any of the following members of the officer's or employee's household: spouse, children (including step-children and adopted children) unmarried and under twenty-one years of age or physically or mentally incapable of self-support regardless of age, and dependent parents.
SECTION 2. The transportation of the immediate family of an officer or employee shall be subject to those provisions of the Standardized Government Travel Regulations which relate to transportation. The cost to the Government shall not exceed the cost of transportation by the most economical route between the last official station and the new official station. No payments shall be authorized hereunder in the event transportation of the immediate family does not begin within six months of the effective date of the transfer of the officer or employee, unless an extension of time is specifically granted by the head of the agency concerned.
This order shall be effective as of July 1, 1945, and shall be published in the FEDERAL REGISTER.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

July 6, 1945