Harry S. Truman
July 05, 1945

Exchange of Messages With the Prime Minister of the Polish Provisional Government of National Unity.
I AM GRATIFIED to learn from your message to me transmitted through your Ambassador at Moscow that the Polish Provisional Government of National Unity was established on June 28, 1945 in conformity with the Crimea decision. I am pleased to note that your Excellency's Government has recognized in their entirety the decisions of the Crimea Conference on the Polish question thereby confirming the intentions of Your Excellency's Government to proceed with the holding of elections in Poland in conformity with the provisions of the Crimea decisions. The Government of the United States of America therefore on the basis of its assurances given at the Crimea Conference hereby establishes diplomatic relations with the Polish Provisional Government of National Unity. I have chosen as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to Poland Mr. Arthur Bliss Lane, whom I have instructed to proceed to Warsaw as soon as possible.
Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.
HARRY, S. TRUMAN
[His Excellency, Edward Osobka-Morawski, Prime Minister of the Polish Provisional Government of National Unity, Warsaw, Poland.]
Note: Prime Minister Osobka-Morawski's message follows:
His Excellency, Mr. Truman, President of the United States of America:
I have the honor to notify you that as a result of the understanding reached in Moscow between Representatives of the Warsaw Provisional Government and Polish Democratic leaders invited from Poland and from abroad under the auspices of the Commission of three set up at the Crimea Conference the Polish Provisional Government of National Unity was formed on the 28th of June, 1945, in accordance with article 45 of the constitution of the Polish Republic of 1921.
The Provisional Government of National Unity has recognized in their entirety the decisions of the Crimea Conference on the Polish question.
At the same time I have the honor in the name of the Provisional Government of National Unity to approach the Government of the United States of America with a request for the establishment of diplomatic relations between our nations and for the exchange of representatives with the rank of Ambassador.
Please accept the assurance of my highest consideration.
OSOBKA-MORAWSKI