Harry S. Truman
July 19, 1947

Statement by the President Upon Signing Resolution Authorizing Approval of Trusteeship Agreement for the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
I HAVE SIGNED the joint resolution authorizing approval by this Government of the Trusteeship Agreement for the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands and have instructed the Secretary of State to notify the appropriate organs of the United Nations that this agreement, having been duly approved by the Security Council and by this Government, enters into force as of this date. It is the intention of this Government to carry out in full the obligations toward the people of the trust territory and toward the United Nations, as specified in the terms of the Trusteeship Agreement and Chapters XI, XII, and XIII of the Charter of' the United Nations.
Under Article 12 of the Trusteeship Agreement, the United States is obligated to enact such legislation as may be necessary to place the provisions of this agreement in effect in the trust territory. This is a responsibility which falls primarily upon the Congress of the United States. In order to assist the Congress in this task, I have asked the Department of State to prepare, in consultation with other interested departments, suggestions for organic legislation for the trust territory. It is expected that these suggestions will be ready for presentation to the Congress at its next session.
With my letter of June 19, 1947, to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, 1 enclosed a letter addressed to me from the Secretary of State. This letter set forth recommendations which were agreed upon by the Secretaries of State, War, Navy, and Interior with respect to the future administration of Guam, American Samoa, and the trust territory, and which I have approved.
Accordingly, I have issued an Executive order terminating military government in the trust territory and delegating responsibility for civil administration on an interim basis to the Navy Department, pending transfer to a civilian department or agency of the Government at the earliest practicable date.
Note: The joint resolution, approved by the President on July 18, 1947, is Public Law 204, 80th Congress (61 Stat. 397). The text of the agreement is printed in House Document 378 (80th Cong., 1st sess.).
For the President's letter of June 19, 1947, see Item 119.
Executive Order 9875 "Providing an Interim Administration for the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands" was issued July 18, 1947 (3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp., p. 658).