Harry S. Truman
July 25, 1946

Letters to Congressional Leaders Urging Enactment of the Housing Bill
Dear Sam:
Representatives of groups have waited upon me and members of my staff endorsing and urging the early passage of S. 1592, the General Housing Act of 1946, which is essential to provide houses at costs and rentals within the reach of the majority of veterans.
On repeated occasions I have not only expressed myself as favorable to the legislation, but requested its speedy enactment. I have today written Chairman Spence of the House Banking and Currency Committee, urging the earliest practicable consideration of the measure.
I trust that you will exert your very best efforts in bringing about immediate consideration of this legislation, which is so essential to the welfare of the veteran and housing generally.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[Honorable Sam Rayburn, The Speaker, The House of Representatives, Washington, D.C.]
Dear John:
I am enclosing a copy of a letter which I have today written to Chairman Spence of the Banking and Currency Committee, which I believe is self-explanatory.
I urge you to exert your best efforts to see that this legislation, vital to the veteran and housing generally, is given the earliest practicable consideration. Time is truly of the essence.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[Honorable John W. McCormack, The House of Representatives, Washington 25, D.C.]
Dear Mr. Chairman:
I urge upon you and your committee the earliest practicable action on S. 1592, the General Housing Act of 1946, which is essential to the over-all housing program and particularly necessary at this time to make effective the veterans' emergency housing program.
The veterans' emergency housing program involves two equally important tasks: (1) to expedite the production of building materials and finished homes, which is being done under the Veterans' Emergency Housing Act of 1946, and (2) to make sure that these houses are made available in sufficient volume at sales prices or rentals which the majority of our veterans and their families can afford, which cannot be achieved without passage of S. 1592.
It is my considered judgment that S. 1592 is urgently needed. I am confident that if this bill reaches the floor the Congress, recognizing the need and the equity of adequate housing for the veteran, will pass the bill in question.
Time is of the essence. I therefore urge again the earliest practicable action on this matter by you and your committee.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[Honorable Brent Spence, Chairman, Committee on Banking and Currency, The House of Representatives, Washington, D.C.]
NOTE: S. 1592, "A bill to establish a national housing policy and provide for its execution," was passed by the Senate and referred by the House.
Earlier, on May 22, the President approved the Veterans' Emergency Housing Act of 1946 (Public Law 388, 79th Cong., 60 Stat. 207) which provided for expediting the availability of housing for World War II veterans.