Harry S. Truman
June 12, 1950

Remarks to the National Association of Radio Farm Directors.
I AM glad to have you ladies and gentlemen here this morning. I think this is the third time I have met with you. I told you, I think, the last time, that I listen to that farm broadcast nearly every morning at 5:30, and that I enjoy it a great deal, and I still enjoy it a great deal.
You know, I have got a couple of nephews, and they have the reputation of being right good farmers. They were written up the other day in one of the metropolitan papers in Missouri, and also got their pictures in Time magazine standing by a gate. And somebody wanted to know if that gate was upside down.
Now, I don't know what that referred to, although there was something in the 1948 campaign about a couple of fellows and one of these swinging gates that was upside down in the picture. But that was all right--it didn't make any difference--didn't cost anybody anything. Made me some votes--which was all right.
I hope you will continue to disseminate information that will be helpful and useful to the farmers.
The progress in farm organization and farm management has been just as great as it has been in our industrial organization and industrial management.
And that is a helpful thing for the country. We are no more worried about getting enough to eat. The only difficulty we have now is with the distribution system, and if we can get that distribution system organized on the same basis as the farm production system and the industrial production system, then most of our domestic problems will be solved.
All we are striving for is to have business and industry, and labor and the farmer on an equal basis, all getting their fair share of the wealth of this great Nation.
We are now in the midst of an increase in that immense income, and we want to keep that increase on an even basis, so that the industrial production, and farm production, and the distribution of these two productions will be on a basis so that everybody can have a fair share, and at a price that we can afford to pay.
I think that is the objective of what you might name the Fair Deal program of the present administration.
I hope you have all enjoyed yourselves. I hope you have had a successful and constructive meeting. I am sure you have. The Secretary of Agriculture tells me he has had a very successful meeting with all of you. I appreciate very much your being here.
Note: The President spoke at 12:15 p.m. on the White House lawn. The National Association of Radio Farm Directors held its annual meeting in Washington on June 12 and 13. The members were to confer with Secretary of Agriculture Charles F. Brannan and other Agriculture Department officials, and were scheduled to spend some time with the congressional agriculture committees.
