Harry S. Truman
June 28, 1948

Statement by the President Upon Signing the Foreign Aid Appropriation Act.
I HAVE signed today H.R. 6801, the Foreign Aid Appropriation Act, 1949, providing funds for the first year of the European recovery program; for aid to Greece, Turkey, and China; for meeting our occupation responsibilities in Europe and the Far East; and for our participation in the International Children's Fund and the International Refugee Organization. The total appropriation for these purposes included in the act is $6,030,710,228.
By far the largest item in this act is the $4 billion appropriation for economic cooperation with Europe. I know that the American people share the deep sense of satisfaction which I feel in taking this final step to make the European recovery program effective. It furnishes concrete evidence and assurance to the free peoples of the world that we stand ready to work side by side with them to preserve free institutions in stability and peace.
In June of last year, the United States indicated its readiness to work with the countries of Europe in developing a program of joint action to achieve economic recovery. Representatives of 16 European countries drew up a program in response to this suggestion and submitted it to this Government in September. After careful study, I submitted to the Congress on December 19 recommendations for legislation to make the European recovery program a reality. Following full consideration by the Congress, this legislation was enacted on April 3.
Then began the last step in the legislative process--the enactment of the necessary appropriations to make the law effective. Again the program was carefully scrutinized and its various elements weighed and tested. As finally enacted, this appropriation is substantially in accord with the program presented to the Congress 6 months ago. It represents the combined judgment and will of the Executive and the Congress. It was evolved in the spirit of cooperation and not of partisan conflict. It demonstrates the united determination of our people to make good our pledge of cooperation to those who, like ourselves, are striving to achieve enduring peace and prosperity among all nations.
Note: As enacted, H.R. 6801 is Public Law 793, 80th Congress (62 Stat. 1054).
For the President's statement on April 3 upon signing the Foreign Assistance Act, see Item 64.