Harry S. Truman
June 07, 1945

Statement by the President on the Transportation Problem.
ALL TOO FEW realize the transportation difficulties which are now developing and which will continue well into 1946. It is important that the public understand the situation and at once lend full cooperation in order that the burden may be minimized.
The transportation performance in mobilizing our victorious in Europe over a period of four long, difficult years required the effort. The plan of battle now requires that our armies be transferred to the far Pacific in the very short time of 10 months. We must now complete in 10 months a task that is only one-third less than the previous job which required nearly 48 months. The transportation job in the first phase of the war has often been called a "miracle." The job ahead of us is even bigger.
The facilities for civilian passenger transportation will be greatly reduced. In order to obtain passenger equipment for troop movements, it will probably be necessary to reduce the capacity of sleeping car equipment on regular trains by 50 percent. Men in uniform, other than on troop movements, now comprise about one-third of the passengers on a regular train. If the number of these travelers in uniform remained constant, a 50 percent reduction in sleeping car capacity on regular trains would mean that only one out of four of the civilians now using this equipment could do so in the future. But the number of travelers in uniform will be greatly increased.
In addition, war material moving to the Pacific will be more than twice as much as heretofore. This tremendous increase must move over the western railroads, which are already loaded to capacity.
Thus the various transportation restrictions will not only be retained but undoubtedly increased. Those asking for relaxation of the restrictions are asking for the impossible.
The situation requires the cooperation and self-denial of all users of transportation. The speed with which our men and munitions can be carried to within striking distance of Japan will largely determine how long the war must continue. I know that every American wants to add his effort to that of the millions of transportation workers on whom this grave responsibility rests.
Remember, the returning soldier is here for a few days on his way from one conflict to another.