Harry S. Truman
June 05, 1952

Letter to the Chairman, Air Coordinating Committee, Transmitting Report of the Airport Commission.
Dear Mr. Nyrop:
I send you herewith the Report of the Airport Commission which was submitted by General Doolittle and his associates on May 16th.
This is a most important document. It sets the pattern for future airport development, taking into consideration the welfare of people who now live near airports, and the continuing well-being of our essential air services, both military and commercial.
The recommendations of the Commission appear to be sound, and I am anxious that a prompt analysis of the report be made, in order that implementation may be undertaken. It seems to me that the Air Coordinating Committee is the appropriate agency to assume this responsibility.
I would appreciate it if your Committee would make an immediate and intensive study of this report and advise me at an early date as to the action that should be taken to put the recommendations of the Commission into effect.

Sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[Mr. Donald W. Nyrop, Chairman, Air Coordinating Committee, Washington 25, D.C.]
Note: The report of the President's Airport Commission, dated May 16, 1952, is entitled "The Airport and Its Neighbors" (Government Printing Office, 116 pp.).
On September 3, 1952, the White House issued a statement on the implementation of the Commission's recommendations. The statement noted that the Air Coordinating Committee had devised a plan for dividing up the many recommendations of the Doolittle Commission so that each phase of the problem could be dealt with by the agency concerned. The statement announced that the President had that day sent letters to the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Commerce, the Postmaster General, and the Chairman of the Civil Aeronautics Board asking them to begin immediately to place into effect the Commission's recommendations.
The agencies also were asked to consult with State and local governments and interested industry groups in the process of implementing the recommendations.
See also Items 40, 41, and release listed in Appendix A under date January 19, 1953.