Harry S. Truman
June 24, 1949

Special Message to the Congress Recommending Further Reorganization of the Post Office Department.
To the Congress of the United States:
No Federal activity touches more closely the daily lives of the people of this nation than the postal service. It is not without reason that for many of our citizens the post office has come to symbolize the Federal Government. The manner in which the Government manages this service, one of the world's largest businesses, is necessarily a matter of direct and vital concern to every person in the United States.
We may justly take pride in the achievements of the Post Office Department. No other country furnishes a better or more varied postal service, and many other countries have used our postal service as a model. The magnitude of its operations may be seen from the fact that the Department in one year transports and delivers more than 40 billion pieces of mail and handles more than 800 million transactions in such special services as money orders, collect-on-delivery mail, and postal savings. The Department has done its vast job well and the effectiveness of its operations is a tribute to the loyalty and "know-how" of its more than 500,000 officers and employees.
The achievements of the Department are all the more remarkable when it is considered that they have been accomplished despite a number of serious handicaps. Many of these handicaps are enumerated in the report of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government. Among the more important obstacles to the efficient administration of the Department noted by the Commission are (1) the maze of out-moded laws which stifle proper administration, (2) the lack of freedom and flexibility essential to the conduct of a business operation, and (3) methods of budgeting and accounting which are entirely unsuited to a business of the size and character of the postal service.
The budget and accounting procedures prescribed by law are particularly cumbersome. Currently, the postal service is operated under 58 separate appropriation items, each of which must be independently justified by the Department officials, reviewed and approved by the Congress, and apportioned for each quarter by the Bureau of the Budget. These individual appropriation items range in amount from $3,000 to over $600,000,000. Every dollar spent must be charged against a specific appropriation, and transfers from one account to another are permitted only within certain narrow limits. The procedures prevent the Department from operating any office as a fiscal unit with the result that the postal management, the President and the Congress are unable to obtain a complete and accurate picture of postal operations.
The Post Office Department obviously can control its annual expenditures only within broad limits. As in the case of any other business, its expenses, and also its income, will vary in proportion to the demand for its services. However, unlike a private business, the Department cannot refuse to serve its customers. Consequently, attempts to place rigid and detailed limitations on specific activities constitutes a positive hindrance to sound management and efficient service to the public.
The Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government indicated that there are four principal objectives toward which improvements in the operations of the postal service should be directed. These are:
1. Accounting, budgeting and auditing procedures designed to improve management's control of the business.
2. Flexibility of expenditures to meet fluctuating demands for postal service and varying conditions of operation on a nationwide scale.
3. Reasonable freedom from restrictive laws and regulations governing contracts, purchases, and personnel practices.
4. Administrative authority commensurate with responsibility.
I am in wholehearted agreement with the objectives set forth by the Commission.
Several steps are essential if we are to accomplish the above goals. I recommend as one of the first steps that legislation be enacted by the Congress to place the Post Office Department under the Government Corporation Control Act of 1945 so that it will have the benefit of the business-type budget, audit and accounting procedures prescribed by that Act. These procedures were specifically devised by the Congress to provide more satisfactory control over Federal activities of a predominantly business nature. This action will strengthen greatly the accountability of the Department to the President and the Congress. This type of budget and audit arrangements will make available to the President and the Congress for the first time the kind of information which is required to appraise accurately the effectiveness of the postal service and to establish adequate controls over its operations.
It will not be sufficient, however, merely to extend the provisions of the Government Corporation Control Act to the Department. As a corollary, the legislation should give to the Department the same degree of financial and operating flexibility as is now possessed by most Federal business enterprises. Such legislation is essential if the postal service is to be conducted on a businesslike basis. It is an axiom of sound administration that authority should be commensurate with responsibility. No authority of management is more important than that of selecting the personnel who are to operate the business. If the Postmaster General is to be held responsible for the efficient conduct of the postal service, he should be given full authority to appoint postmasters and other postal employees subject only to the provisions of the Civil Service and Classification Acts. Legislation should be enacted which will give such authority to the Postmaster General.
In order to strengthen further the management of the Post Office Department, I have transmitted a reorganization plan to the Congress. This plan gives to the Postmaster General essential authority to organize and control his Department by transferring to him the functions of all subordinate officers and agencies of the Department. It also provides for the establishment of the position of Deputy Postmaster General, and an Advisory Board for the Post Office Department. These measures are essential to furnish the Postmaster General with much needed assistance and to make available to him the advice of outstanding private citizens.
Legislation is now before the Congress which would authorize the Postmaster General to establish a research and development program. The investigations and studies under this program would be for the purpose of improving and introducing new equipment, methods, and procedures in the postal service in order that the business of the Post Office Department may be more efficiently and economically handled. Such a research and development program will contribute significantly to the improved operation of the postal service. I urge that the Congress act favorably upon this legislation.
The postal deficit for the fiscal year 1950, on the basis of current postal rates, would be more than 400 million dollars. This deficit results primarily from the volume of postal business which is carried below cost. If the postal service is to be conducted on a businesslike basis, it is essential that the postal rates be brought in line with the increased costs of postal operations. I again strongly urge, as I have in previous messages during the past two years, that the Congress enact an adequate revision of the postal rate structure.
I believe that Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1949, submitted earlier this week, together with legislation along the lines herein recommended, will enable the Government better to make substantial improvements in the existing organization and operations of the Post Office Department.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: On August 16, 1949, the President approved a bill "to provide for a research and development program in the Post Office Department" (63 Stat. 608).
On August 17, 1950, the President approved the Post Office Department Financial Control Act of 1950 (64 Stat. 460).
For the President's special message to the Congress upon signing the Reorganization Act, see Item 127. For the President's message to the Congress transmitting Reorganization Plan 3 of 1949: Post Office Department, see Item 130.