Harry S. Truman
June 29, 1946

Executive Order 9744-B—Regulations Governing the Furnishing of Clothing in Kind Or Payment of Cash Allowances in Liew Thereof to Enlisted Personnel of the Navy, the Coast Guard, the Naval Resere, and the Coast Guard Reserve
By virtue and pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 10 of the Pay Readjustment Act of June 16, 1942 (56 Stat.359, 363), I hereby prescribe the following regulations governing the furnishing of clothing in kind, or payment of cast allowances in lieu thereof, to enlisted personnel of the Navy, the Coast Guard, the Naval Reserve, and the Coast Guard Reserve.
Section A. Clothing in Kind or Cash Allowances in Lieu Thereof.
Enlisted men on active duty shall be entitled to clothing in kind or payment of cash allowances in lieu thereof as follows:
TABLE
Section B. Clothing Allowance.
1. The amount of the cash clothing allowances prescribe in subsection A1(6)hereof shall be payable on date of first enlistment or first reporting for active duty, and on date of reenlistment or recall to active duty subsequent to expiration of three months from date of last discharge or release from active duty, shall not actually be paid prior to the expiration of ninety days from and including such dates, or date of completion of recruit training, or date of advancement to chief petty officer or assignment to band, whichever is earlier. In closing the accounts of a man discharged or released from active duty within the ninety-day period , credit shall be made only of an amount equal to the value of the clothing actually drawn, but in case to exceed the total allowance payable.
2. For the purposes of this order, an enlistment in any of the services mention in section A subsequent to discharge from any other of such services shall be considered an reenlistment. An allowance under subsection A1 shall not be payable upon reenlistment within three months from date of last discharge or upon recall to active duty within three months of last release therefrom, except as specified in subsections 5, 6 and 7 of this section. A man reenlisted or recalled to active duty within three month of last discharge or release from active duty, who on date of such discharge or released was checked undrawn clothing allowance in accordance with subsection 1 of this section, shall be entitled to credit for such undrawn clothing allowance.
3. The allowance under subsection A2 shall not be payable to-
(a) Enlisted men advanced in rating to chief petty officer while holding a temporary appointment to warrant or commissioned rank.
(b) Cooks or stewards on advancement to chief cook or steward.
(c) Members of Navy, Naval Academy, or Coast Guard Academy Bands (band members) upon advancement in rating to chief petty officer.
4. An enlisted man reduced in rating from chief petty officer, cook or steward, shall not be required to refund payment previously made in accordance with subsection A2; and shall not be entitled to a second payment on subsequent advancement, or to a payment of quarterly maintenance allowance prior to the date specified in subsection C1 (a) hereof.
5. An enlisted man first reporting for active duty in a status entitling him only to an issue of clothing in kind in accordance with subsection A6 and A9 (b) hereof, upon subsequent transfer to, or reenlistment within three months of last discharge in, another status which, in case of first enlistment or reporting for active duty, would entitle him to a cash clothing allowance as prescribed in subsection A1 hereof, shall be entitled to a credit of such cash clothing allowance without regard to issues in kind in the prior status, except that an enlisted man entitled to a clothing allowance under subsection A9 (b) on first reporting for active duty in time of war or national emergency shall not be so entitled.
6. An enlisted man first reporting for active duty in a status entitling him only to an issue of clothing in kind in accordance with subsection A7 hereof, upon subsequent transfer to, or reenlistment within three months of last discharge in, another status which, in the case of a first enlistment or reporting for active duty, would entitle him to a case clothing allowance as prescribed in subsection A1 hereof, shall be entitled to a credit of such cash clothing allowance without regard to issues in kind in the prior status.
7. Enlisted personnel described in subsection A9 (a), upon discharge from the Naval Reserve (inactive) for the purpose of enlisting in the Regular Navy or Coast Guard within three months from date of such discharge, shall, if reenlisted in any of the applicable ratings, be entitled to a further cash allowance equal to the difference between the cash allowance payable under subsection A1 (a) hereof, and the amount payable under subsection A9 (a), and such enlisted personnel shall, if enlisted in other ratings in the Regular Navy or Coast Guard, within three months from date of such discharge, be entitled to the cash allowances prescribed in subsection A1 (b) hereof.
Section C. Quarterly Maintenance Allowance.

1. The quarterly maintenance allowance prescribed in section A hereof shall be payable on the first day of each quarter to:
(a) Enlisted men entitled to a clothing allowance under subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 10 of section A, or subsections B5 and B7 hereof, or who are entitled to a clothing allowance under Executive Order 9356 of June 24, 1943, as amended, commencing with the first day of the quarter following the first anniversary of the date on which they were last entitled to such clothing allowance.
(b) Enlisted men of the Navy and Coast Guard reenlisting within three months from date of last discharge, enlisted men of the Reserve components transferred to the regular Service, and enlisted men of the Regular and Reserve components on active duty transferred to the Reserve or to the Retired List and retained on active duty or recalled to active duty within three months of release therefrom, at the rate applicable prior to such discharge, transfer, retirement or release, until entitle to a further clothing allowance.
2. Enlisted men of the Naval Reserve undergoing training leading to a commission, enlisted men of the Naval Reserve (inactive) and enlisted men holding temporary appointments to warrant or commissioned rank shall not be entitled to quarterly maintenance allowances. Enlisted men entitled to a clothing allowance on the first day of the quarter shall not be entitled to any quarterly maintenance allowance otherwise due them on that date.
3. The foregoing provisions of this order shall not be applicable to enlisted members of the Women's Reserve of the Coast Guard Reserve. Such members hall, however, be entitled to a special quarterly maintenance allowance for clothing in the amount of $12.50, payable on the first day of each quarter commencing with the first day of the quarter following the first anniversary of the date on which they first report for active duty.
This order shall supersede Executive Orders Nos. 9356 of June 24, 1943, 9447 of June 8, 1944, 9465 of August 12, 1944, 9525 of February 28, 1945, 9583 of July 2, 1945, and 9642 of October 18, 1945, and shall be in effect for the fiscal year 1947, except that subsection A10 hereof shall be effective also from August 15, 1945 to June 30, 1946.
HARRY S . TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

June 29, 1946