Harry S. Truman
March 03, 1948

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report of the Civil Service Commission.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am transmitting herewith the annual report of the United States Civil Service Commission.
This report deals with the men and women who, as Federal employees, are serving the people of the United States. The strength of our Government is in direct proportion to the character of those employees, and with knowledge of that strength, we can take just pride in our Federal workers and the job they are doing. I know them to be hard working and sincere in their efforts to contribute to the well-being of the United States.
I desire to express my deep appreciation of the splendid service they have rendered during the very difficult transition from war to peace. The quality of this service has been such that I can say with emphasis that the investment we have made in the development of a career civil service over the last 65 years has paid, and is paying, real dividends in the form of loyal and efficient service to the citizens of this Nation. The advancement of those in the career service to positions of increased responsibility and highest rank on the basis of merit is ample evidence of the value of their service. I shall continue to see to it that the civil service system is constantly strengthened and that merit and efficiency are rewarded by advancement.
I am convinced that if the Congress puts into effect the recommendations which are included in the Civil Service Commission's report it will be taking action which will serve to further strengthen the civilian career service.
The complete revision of the Classification Act as recommended by the Civil Service Commission is long overdue. The recommendations of the Commission in this regard if put into effect will correct the dislocation and many inequities in salary rates resulting from the enactment of piecemeal pay laws in the past. In addition, their recommendations will simplify the administration of the Classification Act. In my opinion, the Congress should enact these recommendations into law irrespective of what the final decision may be as to further pay increases for Federal employees generally. Any further patchwork amendments to the Classification Act will stand in the way of efficient salary administration.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The 64th annual report of the United States Civil Service Commission is printed in House Document 455 (80th Cong., 2d sess.).