Harry S. Truman
March 13, 1950

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 15 of 1950.
To the Congress of the United States:

I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 15 of 1950, prepared in accordance with the Reorganization Act of 1949. The plan transfers the functions of the General Services Administration relating to public works in Alaska and in the Virgin Islands to the Department of the Interior. My reasons for transmitting this plan are stated in an accompanying general message.
After investigation I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in Reorganization Plan No. 15 of 1950 is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2(a) of the Reorganization Act of 1949.
The savings to be realized from the transfers provided for in the plan cannot be predicted in detail at this time. The small size and restricted character of the Virgin Islands public works program will prevent large reductions in administrative expenditures. However, by placing the responsibility for the activity in the department generally concerned with the government and welfare of the Islands, the plan will lead to a closer integration of the public works program with verified needs.
The Alaska public works program is new and will continue to grow for some time. As a result the overall costs of administration will increase under any organizational arrangements which may be established. The concentration of responsibility in the Department already charged with the execution of related programs in Alaska and required by law to approve all projects constructed under the Alaska Public Works Act of 1949 should, however, simplify relationships and lead to more economical administration than would otherwise be possible.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: Reorganization Plan 15 of 1950 is published in the U.S. Statutes at Large (64 Stat. 1267) and in the 1949-1953 Compilation of title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (p. 1007). It became effective on May 24, 1950.