Harry S. Truman
March 28, 1951

Remarks to Members of the Associated Church Press.
WELL, I am glad to greet you again. I think you have been here a couple of times before. I was hoping that the sun would shine on this proposed rose garden--which it will be a little later on in the season--but it seems to have gone back on us this morning.
I have one subject on which I am somewhat "hipped," but a good subject cannot be reiterated too many times, and that is the endeavor of those countries who believe in the freedom of the individual to mobilize the moral forces of the world for the welfare of mankind against the unmoral forces in the world.
I have been very emphatic on this subject on occasion after occasion--I guess people, after a while, will get tired of my continually talking on this one subject, but it is the most important thing we are faced with in the world today. And your audience, your readers, are the ones who can do most toward causing that mobilization.
In this time of crisis with which we are faced now, petty things should be forgotten, denominational quarrels should be overlooked. Everybody is headed for the same place, and they are headed on the same train, and under the same engineer.
What we want to do is to see that those forces in the world that believe in honor and ethics, and uprightness and the keeping of agreements, are in control of the world when we are finished. And that is for the welfare of the people--all the people, not for the welfare of governments.
Our Government is a government of the people, for the people, and by the people, and we are trying to make it work as best we can. And we are making it work. What we want to do is to convince the people behind the Iron Curtain that we do not, under any circumstances, want to control or tell them what to do. All we want is for them--for their own welfare and benefit-to do the things that are necessary for the welfare of their own people, and to do it in their own way. Raise the curtain, and let us see how they do it. Maybe they can teach us something. I know we can teach them something, if they will come and look at us. But they won't come and make the effort to implement the mobilization of the moral forces of the world--all of them--against the unmoral forces.
Then we will have peace in the world. And that's all we are striving for. That's all in the world we are striving for.
I thank you very much. I appreciate your coming. I hope you enjoy your visit, and I hope you don't catch cold standing out here in this shower.
Note: The President spoke at 11:50 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House.