Harry S. Truman
March 15, 1950

Statement by the President on the National Capital Sesquicentennial Commission.
I HAVE examined reports on the progress made by the National Capital Sesquicentennial Commission and have been encouraged to note that many of the difficulties caused by the long delay in obtaining an appropriation for the work of the Commission are now being surmounted. Because of lack of funds, the Commission was faced with the difficult task of creating a celebration of major proportions in less than a third of the time usually available for such purposes. The Commission's work has now reached a point at which a number of its plans for a suitable observance of the sesquicentennial anniversary are ready for actual operation.
It has been found necessary to postpone the Freedom Fair for a year. Certain legal questions must be settled, and a suitable site must be chosen, before a final decision can be reached on the eventual size and scope of the fair. I hope that all these problems will soon be resolved; for the Freedom Fair can, by its demonstration of the growth of our Nation under free enterprise, do much to show to the world the strength of our institutions.
The remainder of the plans for the observance of the 150th anniversary of the establishment of the Federal Government in the city of Washington are well advanced. Collectively, they will provide a stimulating and interesting program, one which should attract many thousands of our citizens to Washington to join with us in the celebration and help to give it the truly national character it should have.
The work of the Commission deserves the full support of the citizens of Washington. I am sure that they will welcome this opportunity to manifest their faith in our governmental system, of which the city of Washington is a noble symbol.
Note: On April 12, 1950, the President signed Proclamation 2881 "National Capital Sesquicentennial" (3 CFR, 1949-1953 Comp., p. 54).
In a telegram dated May 10, 1950, Carter Barton, Executive Vice Chairman of the Sesquicentennial Commission, informed the President that the Commission's Executive Committee had decided to recommend that the proposed Freedom Fair be abandoned.