Harry S. Truman
March 13, 1950

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 18 of 1950.
To the Congress of the United States:

I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 18 of 1950, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Reorganization Act of 1949. The plan transfers to the Administrator of General Services the functions of the various Federal agencies with respect to leasing and assigning general purpose space in buildings and the operation, maintenance and custody of office buildings. Since such authority is already largely concentrated in the General Services Administration with respect to the District of Columbia, the plan principally relates to the administration of these functions in the field.
The transfers made by this plan will promote more economical leasing, better utilization of building space, and more efficient operation of Government-controlled office buildings. They will effectuate the recommendations of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government with respect to concentrating in the General Services Administration the responsibility for space allotment and the operation of Government buildings outside of the District of Columbia. Likewise, they will extend the principles laid down by the Congress in enacting the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 to another important area of Government-wide administrative services--the administration of Government office buildings and general purpose building space in the field.
Within the District of Columbia, one agency, the Public Buildings Service of the General Services Administration, has long had the operation and custody of most Government buildings and the leasing and assignment of space for executive agencies. Thus, nearly all requests for building space are handled by a single organization which is responsible for seeing that agencies are properly and efficiently housed. This arrangement has proved its worth and has repeatedly been approved by the Congress.
Outside of the National Capital, however, responsibility for the acquisition and control of building space and the operation of Government buildings is widely diffused. A variety of agencies operate and control general purpose buildings. If quarters are not available in Federal buildings, each agency ordinarily does its own leasing. As a result, in some cases Federal agencies have contracted for space at high rentals at the very time that other agencies have been giving up surplus low-cost space.
The assignment of space in Government owned buildings outside of Washington is also divided among a number of agencies. While the Public Buildings Service constructs a large part of the Government buildings, it operates and controls the assignment of space in only a small proportion of them. The Post Office Department operates and allocates the space in post office buildings, several hundred of which contain substantial amounts of office space available for other agencies. During and immediately after the war several other Federal agencies acquired office buildings in the field. As their activities have contracted, surplus space in many of these structures has become available for other uses.
This plan concentrates in the General Services Administration the responsibility for the leasing and assignment of what is termed general purpose building space, that is, space which is suitable for the uses of a number of Federal agencies. It specifically excludes space in buildings at military posts, arsenals, navy yards, and similar defense installations and space in hospitals, laboratories, factories and other special purpose buildings.
Also, the plan excludes the Post Office Department from the transfer of leasing authority since the Department has a highly developed organization for this purpose, and it limits the transfer of space assignment authority in post office buildings to the space not occupied by the Department. Further, it gives the needs of the Post Office Department priority in the assignment of space in post office buildings. Thus, the plan amply safeguards the interests of the Post Office Department while making it possible to include the general office space in post office buildings in any given city with other similar space under Federal control in planning and executing an efficient program for housing Government agencies in that area.
In addition, the plan transfers to the General Services Administration the operation, maintenance, and custody of office buildings owned or leased by the Government, including those post office buildings which are not used predominantly for post office purposes. This will make it possible to establish a single organization for the operation and maintenance of Government office buildings in principal cities in the field as has proved desirable in the National Capital. Since many post offices are in fact primarily large office buildings, the plan includes in this transfer the post office buildings which are not used predominantly for post office purposes. This will relieve the Post Office Department of a considerable expenditure for building operation and maintenance which properly should not be charged against postal revenues.
While the plan effects a broad transfer of functions with respect to leasing and assignment of space and the operation and maintenance of office buildings, it specifically authorizes the Administrator of General Services to delegate the performance of any part of these functions to other agencies subject to such regulations as he deems desirable for economical and effective administration. In this the plan follows the pattern adopted by the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 for other branches of property management. In large urban centers where numerous Federal units are located unified administration of space activities by the General Services Administration will normally be advantageous. On the other hand, in the smaller communities it will no doubt be desirable to delegate the work back to the agencies directly affected, to be carried on under standards laid down by the Administrator of General Services. The plan provides ample flexibility for working out the most effective administrative arrangement for each type of situation.
The fundamental soundness and economy of centralized administration of building space have been amply demonstrated in the National Capital. By virtue of unified control it has been possible since the war to accomplish far-reaching changes which have consolidated agencies in much fewer locations, released many of the rented buildings, and greatly reduced the cost of housing the Government establishment. Similar procedures applied in the larger centers of field activity should produce substantial savings.
After investigation, I have found and hereby declare, that each reorganization contained in this plan is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2(a) of the Reorganization Act of 1949.
While it is not possible at this time to calculate the reduction in expenditures which will result from this plan, it can safely be predicted that it will produce substantial savings. I am confident that this reorganization plan will constitute a significant improvement in Federal business practice and will bring about an important increase in efficiency in housing Government agencies.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: Reorganization Plan 18 of 1950 is published in the U.S. Statutes at Large (64 Stat. 1270) and in the 1949-1953 Compilation of title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (p. 1009). It became effective on July 1, 1950.