Harry S. Truman
March 10, 1949

Executive Order 10042—Making Certain Changes in the Customs Field Organization
By virtue of the authority vested in me by section 1 of the act of August 1, 1914, 38 Stat. 623 (19 U.S.C. 2), and in the interest of the internal management of the Government, it is ordered that the following changes be, and they are hereby, made in the customs field organization:
1. Elkin, North Carolina, is designated as a customs port of entry in Customs Collection District No. 15 (North Carolina).
2. Cordova, Alaska, is designated as a customs port of entry in Customs Collection District No. 31 (Alaska).
3. The designation of Cheboygan, Michigan, as a customs port of entry in Customs Collection District No 38 (Michigan) is revoked.
4. The designations of Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and Arroyo, Puerto Rico, as customs ports of entry in Customs Collection District No. 49 (Puerto Rico) are revoked.
5. The limits of the customs port of entry of Alexandria Bay, New York, in Customs Collection District Number 7 (St. Lawrence), are extended to include the Township of Alexandria, County of Jefferson, State of New York, and that portion of the Township of Orleans, County of Jefferson, State of New York, lying north of 44° 15', north latitude.
6. The limits of the customs port of entry of Wilmington North Carolina, in Customs Collection District Number 15 (North Carolina), are extended to include that portion of the Township of Masonboro, County of New Hanover, State of North Carolina, lying west of 77° 55', west longitude.
7. The limits of the customs port of entry of Mobile, Alabama, in Customs Collection District Number 19 (Mobile), are extended to include that portion of Blakeley Island lying south of the Cochrane Bridge Causeway; Pinto Island; and the area comprising the Brookley Air Field.
8. The limits of the customs port of entry of San Francisco-Oakland, California, in Customs Collection District Number 28 (San Francisco), are extended to include all points on San Pablo Bay, Carquinez Strait, and Suisun Bay, and all points on the San Joaquin River in Contra Costa County, State of California, as far as Antioch Bridge.
This order shall become effective on the thirtieth day following the date hereof.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

March 10, 1949