Harry S. Truman
May 26, 1952

Executive Order 10355—Delegating to the Secretary of the Interior the Authority of the President to Withdraw or Reserve Lands of the United States for Public Purposes
By virtue of the authority vested in me by section 301 of title 3 of the United States Code (section 10 of Public Law 248, 82d Congress), and as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. (a) Subject to the provisions of subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, I hereby delegate to the Secretary of the Interior the authority vested in the President by section 1 of the act of June 25, 1910, ch. 421, 36 Stat. 847 (43 U.S.C. 141), and the authority otherwise vested in him to withdraw or reserve lands of the public domain and other lands owned or controlled by the United States in the continental United States or Alaska for public purposes, including the authority to modify or revoke withdrawals and reservations of such lands heretofore or hereafter made.
(b) All orders issued by the Secretary of the Interior under the authority of this order shall be designated as public land orders and shall be submitted to the Division of the Federal Register, General Services Administration, for filing and for publication in the FEDERAL REGISTER.
(c) No order affecting land under the administrative jurisdiction of any executive department or agency of the Government other than the Department of the Interior shall be issued by the Secretary of the Interior under the authority of this order without the prior approval or concurrence, so far as the order affects such land, of the head of the department or agency concerned, or of such officer of the department or agency concerned as the head thereof may designate for such purpose: Provided, that such officer is required to be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
(d) Any disagreement between two or more executive departments or agencies with respect to any proposed withdrawal or reservation shall be referred to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget for consideration and adjustment. The Director may, in his discretion, submit the matter to the President for his determination.
SEC. 2. The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to issue such rules and regulations, and to prescribe such procedures, as he may from time to time deem necessary or desirable for the exercise of the authority delegated to him by this order.
SEC. 3. The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to redelegated the authority delegated to him by this order to one or more of the following-designated officers: the Under Secretary of the Interior and the Assistant Secretaries of the Interior.
SEC. 4. This order supersedes Executive Order No. 9337 of April 24, 1943, (1) entitled "Authorizing the Secretary of the Interior To Withdraw and Reserve Lands of the Public Domain and Other Lands Owned or Controlled by the United States".
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

May 26, 1952