Harry S. Truman
May 25, 1950

Joint Declaration With the United Kingdom and France on the Arab States and Israel.
THE GOVERNMENTS of the United Kingdom, France, and the United States today issued the following Joint Declaration:
"The Governments of the United Kingdom, France, and the United States, having had occasion during the recent Foreign Ministers' Meeting in London to review certain questions affecting the peace and stability of the Arab states and of Israel, and Particularly that of the supply of arms and war material to these states, have resolved to make the following statements:
"I. The three Governments recognize that the Arab states and Israel all need to maintain a certain level of armed forces for the purposes of assuring their internal security and their legitimate self-defense and to permit them to play their part in the defense of the area as a whole. All applications for arms or war material for these countries will be considered in the light of these principles. In this connection the three Governments wish to recall and reaffirm the terms of the statements made by their representatives on the Security Council on August 4th, 1949, in which they declared their opposition to the development of an arms race between the Arab states and Israel.
"2. The three Governments declare that assurances have been received from all the states in question, to which they permit arms to be supplied from their countries, that the purchasing state does not intend to undertake any act of aggression against any other state. Similar assurances will be requested from any other state in the area to which they permit arms to be supplied in the future. "3. The three Governments take this opportunity of declaring their deep interest in and their desire to promote the establishment and maintenance of peace and stability in the area and their unalterable opposition to the use of force or threat of force between any of the states in that area. The three Governments, should they find that any of these states was preparing to violate frontiers or armistice lines, would, consistently with their obligations as members of the United Nations, immediately take action, both within and outside the United Nations, to prevent such violation."
Note: See also Item 148.