Harry S. Truman
May 10, 1951

Statement by the President in Response to Report of the Committee on Religion and Welfare in the Armed Forces.
THE REPORT of the President's Committee on Religion and Welfare in the Armed Forces is the first complete appraisal of these important programs since World War II. I am confident it will provide an invaluable guide for our expanding Armed Forces in the days to come and serve as a basis for allocating adequate funds for these essential services.
It is clear from the report that our Armed Forces are making good progress in the efforts to build strong unit and individual morale through the provision of worthwhile opportunities for service men and women to use their free time in constructive ways. However, the Committee has specifically pointed out a number of ways in which improvement can be effected.
I regret that the Congress has not seen fit to provide funds for the continuance of the work of the President's Committee on Religion and Welfare in the Armed Forces. The Committee has produced impartial appraisals on many important aspects of life in the Armed Forces, and it has helped to promote and secure constructive activities for service men and women through its work in civilian communities located near installations of the Armed Forces.
Note: The report, describing the Committee's study of the Armed Forces special services and recreation programs, was entitled "Free Time in the Armed Forces" (Government Printing Office, 1951, 79 pp.). The report was the third in a series evaluating aspects of morale in the Armed Forces, the other two dealing with the military chaplaincy (see 1950 volume, this series, Item 297) and the Armed Forces information and education program. An earlier report, "Community Responsibility to Our Peacetime Servicemen and Women," was made public by the President on April 8, 1949 (1949 volume, this series, Item 73).
For the President's letter to the Chairman on the conclusion of the Committee's work, see Item 17.