Harry S. Truman
May 31, 1950

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 26 of 1950.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 26 of 1950, prepared in accordance with the Reorganization Act of 1949 and effecting reorganizations in the Department of the Treasury. The reorganizations included in this plan are identical with those contained in Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1950, except that the functions of the Comptroller of the Currency are unaffected by Reorganization Plan No. 26 of 1950.
In transmitting Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1950 on March 13, I stated that the reorganizations contained therein were essential to clarification of the lines of authority and responsibility in the executive branch I further emphasized that those reorganizations would put into effect in the Department of the Treasury the principal remaining recommendations of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government affecting the location of management responsibility. I urged the Congress to add its approval to my acceptance of these recommendations of the Commission on Organization.
On May 11 the Senate disapproved Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1950. The reason for the disapproval was the inclusion of the functions of the Comptroller of the Currency among the responsibilities proposed to be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury. Accordingly, in order to meet the objection which led to such disapproval and to preserve the major benefits of the disapproved plan, Reorganization Plan No. 26 of 1950 is transmitted herewith.
After investigation I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in Reorganization Plan No. 26 of 1950 is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2(a) of the Reorganization Act of 1949.
I have found and hereby declare that it is necessary to include in the accompanying reorganization plan, by reason of reorganizations made thereby, provisions for the appointment and compensation of an Administrative Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. The rate of compensation fixed for this officer is that which I have found to prevail in respect of comparable officers in the executive branch of the Government.
The taking effect of the reorganizations included in this plan may not in itself result in substantial immediate savings. However, many benefits in improved operations are probable during the next years which will result in a reduction in expenditures as compared with those that would be otherwise necessary. An itemization of these reductions in advance of actual experience under this plan is not practicable.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: Reorganization Plan 26 of 1950 is published in the U.S. Statutes at Large (64 Stat. 1280) and in the 1949-1953 Compilation of title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (p. 1017). It became effective on July 31, 1950.