Harry S. Truman
May 22, 1946

Letter to the Director of War Mobilization and Reconversion Concerning the Establishment of U.N. Headquarters.
[ Released May 22, 1946. Dated May 18, 1946 ]
My dear Mr. Snyder:
With respect to the establishment of the temporary headquarters of the United Nations in New York, I have advised Mr. Stettinius as follows in a telegram dated May 14:
"I am very glad to authorize you to inform the Secretary General that the United States Government will firmly support him in his effort to carry out the General Assembly's decision to establish the temporary headquarters of the United Nations in New York for an interim period of three years.
"You are also authorized to confirm to Lie and to other delegations that the Federal Government will give all appropriate assistance to the United Nations in connection with arrangements for temporary headquarters."
These arrangements will include the granting of priorities for materials, the making available of physical facilities controlled by the Federal Government, and such other steps as may be necessary not only to provide the United Nations with adequate office space, conference rooms, assembly hall and other facilities to be used by it, but also to assure adequate housing and transportation for members of the Secretariat and the delegations of the Member Nations.
In case of any differences of opinion as to the appropriate steps to be taken, I request you to exercise by the issuance in your discretion of appropriate directives, the full powers which have been delegated to you under applicable statutes and executive orders. In any case where, in your opinion, action should be taken by any officials of the Federal Government in this matter which they are unwilling to take and which you are not authorized to direct, I would appreciate your bringing the matter to my attention for decision.

Sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[The Honorable John W. Snyder, Director, Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion, The White House]