Harry S. Truman
November 21, 1945

Statement by the President Concerning Government Operation of Transit Facilities in the District of Columbia.
I HAVE TODAY directed the Office of Defense Transportation to take over the control and operation of the buses, street cars and other facilities of the transportation system of the District of Columbia.
The strike now in effect by the members of Division 689 of the Amalgamated Association of Street, Electric, Railway and Motor Coach Employees of America has been called for the second time during this month in violation of a formal written agreement between the union and the employer.
The present agreement does not expire until June 30, 1946. It provides for arbitration of any disputes, and guarantees that service upon the transportation lines of the District shall not be interrupted or interfered with by either party during the life of the contract.
The agreement does provide for opening wage scale negotiations under certain conditions, but it is clear that arbitration instead of a strike is intended to be the means of settlement if agreement can not be voluntarily reached.
The present action of the union in walking out is therefore contrary to the agreement. It is also contrary to the orders of the officials of the local union and of the international union.
The effect of the strike is to tie up all transportation at the seat of government and thereby prevent efficient and normal operation of the agencies of government during this vital reconversion period. It is a blow at the sanctity of labor agreements. It strikes, too, at the very roots of orderly government. The action of this union brings discredit upon the whole body of organized labor, which naturally decries any violation of sacred covenant.
The Federal Government will not permit this kind of action to interfere with its processes either in the capital or any part of the nation.
Note: Executive Order 9658 (3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp., p. 476) directing the Office of Defense Transportation to take possession, control, and operate the facilities of the Capital Transit Company in Washington, was released with the President's statement.