Harry S. Truman
November 23, 1945

Citation Accompanying the Legion of Merit Awarded to Crown Prince Olav of Norway.
CITATION FOR LEGION OF MERIT
DEGREE OF CHIEF COMMANDER
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS, Crown Prince Olav of Norway, displayed exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services from August 1944 to July 1945. His friendly cooperation, diligent effort and tireless energy greatly assisted United States forces fighting for the liberation of Norway. Through his loyal and thorough devotion to freedom and his sincere desire for the triumph of the Allied cause, he encouraged the Norwegian forces and people in their sustained effort against the enemy. His active participation in the solution of many problems arising in connection with the defeat of the German forces gained for Prince Olav the admiration and respect of the Allied nations.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The citation was released with the following letter from Crown Prince Olav, dated October 22, 1945:
My dear Mr. President:
On the occasion of your most generous presentation of the Cross of Chief Commander of the Legion of Merit, together with a most kind citation, I wish to express, in a more personal way, my sincerest thanks for the great honor you, Sir, have been kind enough to show me.
I feel very strongly that this honor has been given me, not so much for my small services to our great common cause, but as a recognition of the part played by the Norwegian Armed Forces and the Norwegian Merchant Marine in the great conflict which at last has been so triumphantly won by our combined efforts, and in which you, your great predecessor President Roosevelt and the whole of the people of the United States have taken such a great part and which you have brought to such a sweeping conclusion.
Allow me, Sir, to say how closely we have followed the achievements of your Armed Forces on all battlefronts and the overwhelming battle of production on the Home Front. We have noted with admiration the victorious progress against Japan as the last of the Axis powers to fall to the combined might of the United Nations, of which the brunt was carried by the United States.
Let me once more tell you, Sir, how much I and my Family have appreciated all the kindness and friendship which has been shown us during our stay in the United States, and how strongly we have felt the understanding and goodwill towards our people during these years of oppression and plight.
Everyone here has, I believe, enjoyed having your soldiers amongst us. It is with great regret we have had to say goodbye to fine men and good friends, even if we are all pleased to know that their work, which was performed in such a fine and pleasing way, is done.
I am sure that the friendships which have been established here between the American soldiers and the Norwegians will strengthen and cement even more closely the feeling of comradeship and kinship which has always existed between our two peoples.
May the lesson of interdependence of all freedom-loving people be really and truly learnt and remembered, so that we may stand together, and together go in for an active Peace in such a manner that we will not tolerate anyone to break that peace, or allow aggression to raise its ugly and greedy head again.
I once more renew my most heartfelt thanks for all kindness shown to me and my Family.
With the Crown Princess's and my own best and warmest regards to yourself, Sir, and to Mrs. Truman, I remain,
Most gratefully and sincerely yours,
OLAV