Harry S. Truman
October 23, 1947

The President's News Conference Announcing the Calling of a Special Session of Congress
THE PRESIDENT. Gentlemen, I have a statement to read to you.
[Reading, not literally] "I have met this afternoon with a group of congressional leaders. I presented to them detailed information concerning the alarming and continuing increase in prices in this country and the situation regarding the need for emergency foreign aid. I informed them that I had concluded it was necessary to convene the Congress on Monday, November 17th.
"By that date the members of Congress who are now abroad obtaining firsthand information will have returned to the United States.
"There are two compelling reasons for convening Congress at an early date.
"It is urgently necessary for the Congress to take legislative action designed to put an end to the continued rise in prices, which is causing hardship to millions of American families and endangering the prosperity and welfare of the entire Nation. When the Congress meets, I shall recommend to it suitable measures for dealing with inflation, high prices, and the high cost of living.
"It is also necessary for this Government to take adequate steps to meet the crisis in Western Europe, where certain countries have exhausted their financial resources and are unable to purchase the food and fuel which are essential if their people are to survive the coming winter.
"It now appears that the minimum needs of France can be met with present funds only until about the end of December, and that it will enter the new year without funds to pay for essential imports. Italy's needs are even more immediate, for Italy will require substantial assistance before the end of this year. Moreover, it appears that additional funds will be needed to maintain our position in occupied areas. It is clear, therefore, that congressional action cannot be delayed until January.
"The convening of the Congress in November will also furnish an opportunity for it to speed up its consideration of the part to be played by the United States in the long-range European recovery program.
"I have just signed a proclamation1convening the Congress at 12 o'clock noon on Monday, November 17th.
1Proclamation 2751 "Convening the Congress" (Oct. 23, 1947, 3 CFR, 1943-1948 Comp., p. 132).
"Tomorrow evening, over all the network, I shall make a radio address1to the American people describing the present situation in detail and explaining why action by the Congress is necessary prior to the regularly scheduled session in January." That's all, gentlemen.
1See Item 214.
Q. Will you give us the time you will go on the air, Mr. President?
THE PRESIDENT. Ten o'clock. Ten o'clock tomorrow night I will answer all questions.
Reporter: Thank you, Mr. President.
Note: President Truman's one hundred and twenty-fifth news conference was held in his office at the White House at 3:35 p.m. on Thursday, October 23, 1947.