Harry S. Truman
October 05, 1948

Executive Order 10005—Establishing the President's Advisory Commission on the Relation of Federal Laws to Puerto Rico
WHEREAS section 9 of the Organic Act of Puerto Rico, 39 Stat. 954 (48 U.S. C. 734), provides that "the statutory laws of the United States not locally inapplicable, except as hereinbefore or hereinafter otherwise provided, shall have the same force and effect in Puerto Rico as in the United States"; and
WHEREAS section 49b(3) of the said Act, which was added by section 6 of the act of August 5, 1947, 61 Stat. 772 (48 U.S.C. 793b), provides that "the President of the United States may, from time to time, after hearing, promulgate Executive orders expressly excepting Puerto Rico from the application of any Federal law, not expressly declared by Congress to be applicable to Puerto Rico, which as contemplated by section 9 of this act is inapplicable by reason of local conditions":
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the said Organic Act of Puerto Rico, and as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
1. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the President's Advisory Commission on the Relation of Federal Laws to Puerto Rico, which shall be composed of nine members to be designated by the President and to serve without compensation.
2. The Commission shall from time to time make recommendations to the President concerning the exercise of his power under section 49b(3) of the Organic Act of Puerto Rico to exempt Puerto Rico from the application of Federal laws. To that end, the Commission is authorized to examine into, and to hold hearings on, the inapplicability of Federal laws to Puerto Rico by reason of local conditions.
3. All executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government are authorized and directed to cooperate with the Commission in its work and to furnish the Commission such information as the Commission may require in the performance of its duties.
4. The Commission shall continue to exist until the President terminates its existence by Executive order.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

October 5, 1948