Harry S. Truman
October 03, 1945

Executive Order 9637—Medal for Merit
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 2 of the act of July 20, 1942, 56 Stat. 662, I hereby prescribe the following rules and regulations for the award of the decoration of the Medal for Merit, created by the said act:
1. The decoration of the Medal for Merit shall be awarded only by the President of the United States or at his direction. Awards of the Medal for Merit may be made to such civilians of the nations prosecuting the war under the joint declaration of the United States and of other friendly foreign nations as have distinguished themselves by exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services in the furtherance of the prosecution of the war since the proclamation of an emergency by the President on September 8, 1939. Awards of the Medal for Merit made to civilians of foreign nations shall be for the performance of an exceptionally meritorious or courageous act or acts in furtherance of the war efforts of the United Nations.
2. There is hereby established the Medal for Merit Board, which shall be composed of three members appointed by the President, one of whom shall be designated by the President to act as Chairman of the Board.
3. The Medal for Merit Board shall receive and consider proposals for the award of the decoration of the Medal for Merit and submit to the President the recommendations of the Board with respect thereto. In the case of proposed awards to civilians of foreign nations, such recommendations shall include the recommendations of the Secretary of State.
4. The Medal for Merit Board is authorized to prescribe, with the approval of the President, such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this order as may be necessary to accomplish its purposes.
5. Executive Order 9331 of April 19, 1943, and the Medal for Merit Board created thereby, are superseded by this order.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

October 3, 1945