Harry S. Truman
October 11, 1950

Executive Order 10168—Regulations Relating to the Right of Enlisted Members of the Uniformed Services to Additional Pay for Sea and Foreign Duty
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 206 of the Career Compensation Act of 1949, approved October 12, 1949 (Public Law 351, 81st Congress), and as President of the United States and Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, I hereby prescribe the following regulations relating to the right of enlisted members of the uniformed services to receive additional pay (referred to herein as sea-duty pay or foreign-duty pay) while on sea duty or while on duty in any place beyond the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska:
SECTION 1. Enlisted members entitled to receive basic pay shall be entitled to receive, additionally, sea-duty pay while on sea duty as defined in section 2 hereof, the period of such duty to include the date of reporting and the date of detachment as stated in orders.
SECTION 2. For additional-pay purposes, and except as otherwise provided in section 3 hereof, sea duty shall mean duty performed by enlisted members:
(a) While permanently assigned to a vessel, other than a vessel restricted to service in the inland waters of the United States or a non-self-propelled vessel, pursuant to orders issued by competent authority, including periods not in excess of fifteen consecutive days each while on temporary additional duty ashore.
(b) While permanently assigned to a ship-based aviation unit pursuant to orders issued by competent authority, including periods not in excess of fifteen consecutive days each (1) while on temporary additional duty ashore or (2) while such unit is temporarily based ashore. (The term "temporarily based ashore" refers to a ship-based aviation unit that has been landed ashore with intent to return to a ship.)
(c) While on a vessel pursuant to orders issued by competent authority although based or stationed ashore, but only when such duty is eight days or more in duration in each case.
(d) While on a vessel restricted to service in the inland waters of the United States or on a non-self-propelled vessel, but only on days when such vessel is actually operating outside of inland waters for a period of eight days or more in each case.
(e) While permanently assigned, pursuant to orders issued by competent authority, to a commissioned landing-craft-tank squadron or a commissioned motor-torpedo-boat squadron which is a tactical component of an operating fleet in an active status and subject to movement as an integral unit of such fleet.
SECTION 3. Except as provided in section 2(c) hereof, no enlisted member shall, for additional-pay purposes, be considered to be on sea duty:
(a) While on duty on a receiving ship or station ship.
(b) While on duty on a vessel which is in an inactive status.
(c) While on duty with shore-based administrative or maintenance organizations of any unit.
SECTION 4. Enlisted members entitled to receive basic pay shall be entitled to receive, additionally, foreign-duty pay while on duty beyond the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska. Such duty shall include duty performed by enlisted members:
(a) On the date of departure from the continental limits of the United States to join a vessel or to report for sea duty or other duty beyond the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska.
(b) While en route between duty stations, afloat or ashore, beyond the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska.
(c) While en route to the United States after detachment from sea duty or foreign duty, the period en route to include the date of return to the continental limits of the United States.
(d) During periods spent on temporary additional duty or temporary duty or on operational aircraft flights outside the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska while assigned to permanent duty in the continental United States, but only when such duty or flights are eight days or more in duration in each case, including the date of departure from and the date of return to the continental limits of the United States.
SECTION 5. Foreign-duty pay shall not accrue for periods of temporary additional duty or temporary duty within the continental limits of the United States.
SECTION 6. Enlisted members shall not be entitled to additional pay for sea duty or foreign duty under circumstances which, under the provisions of supplementary regulations prescribed hereunder, do not constitute either sea duty or duty in a place beyond the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska.
SECTION 7. No enlisted member shall be entitled under this order to receive both sea-duty pay and foreign-duty pay for the same period of time.
SECTION 8. The Secretaries concerned (within the meaning of section 102(f) of the said Career Compensation Act of 1949), with respect to personnel of the uniformed services within their respective departments, are hereby authorized to prescribe such supplementary regulations, not inconsistent herewith, as they may deem necessary or desirable for carrying out these regulations, and such supplementary regulations shall be uniform for all the services to the fullest extent practicable.
SECTION 9. This order shall become effective on November 1, 1950.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

October 11, 1950