Harry S. Truman
October 29, 1948

Statement by the President on the National Holiday of Turkey.
ON THE 25th anniversary of the founding of the Republic of Turkey, the people of the United States join me in extending cordial greetings and best wishes to President Inonu and to the people of Turkey.
The full significance of this anniversary could hardly have been foreseen a quarter of a century ago when the Turkish Republic was proclaimed. In America, we were from the beginning filled with admiration for the resolute struggle of the Turkish nation to go forward under the indomitable leadership of Turkey's first President, Kemal Ataturk. We have watched with sympathetic interest the profound social and cultural reforms effected in two brief decades. We are happy that the advancements of science in this airtravel age have so reduced the distance between our two countries that we no longer feel remotely separated. We are still happier that the decision of the Turkish nation to continue the development of democratic institutions and to further safeguard human rights and liberties is being carried out at a time when these ideals--so dear to all Americans-are being ruthlessly crushed and obliterated in many parts of the world.
The political independence and territorial integrity of Turkey are of great importance to the security of the United States and of all freedom-loving peoples. In conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, I recommended to the American Congress on March 12, 1947, the extension of assistance to Turkey and to Greece. This program, as authorized by the American Congress 2 1/2 months later, has since been extended for a second year--that is, through June 1949. The effective way in which Turkish and American personnel are cooperating on this program is a further, and most striking, example of the mutual ties that bind our countries.
I am deeply grateful that during this troubled postwar period the relations between the United States and the Republic of Turkey, inspired by a common ideal for the establishment of security for all nations through just and lasting peace, have been strengthened and consolidated.
Note: For the President's special message to the Congress on Greece and Turkey enunciating the Truman Doctrine and for his statement upon signing the bill endorsing the Truman Doctrine, see 1947 volume, this series, Items 56 and 100.