Harry S. Truman
September 28, 1946

Remarks to the Cadet Corps at West Point.
General Taylor, General Higgins, members of the Cadet Corps:
It is a pleasure and a privilege to me today to pay you an official visit as the Commanderin-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States of America. In my youth many, many years ago, I had hopes of being a member of this Corps. I didn't make it. I am sure--morally certain--that if I had made it, I think I would have made a good officer, at least I would have tried.
We are facing a situation now which every country has faced after a terrible emergency. We are facing the situation now that we faced after World War I, that we faced after the War Between the States, and that we faced after the war for the freedom of the Colonies. It is nothing new. There is going to come a time now when people are going to be sorry that they ever saw a soldier or a sailor or a marine. Don't let that worry you. We are going to need leadership now, and from now on, just as badly as we have needed it in this great emergency through which we have just been.
I want to say to you young gentlemen that leadership is naturally ingrained into some men. My definition of leadership is.' It is that quality which can make other men do what they do not want to do, and like it. That is your duty. That is going to be your job. That doesn't mean that your leadership has to be confined entirely to your military education. Some of our greatest civilian leaders right now are men who have been trained to a military leadership. Three shining examples: General Marshall who is now in China doing a wonderful job for the Government of the United States, and General Bradley, and Admiral Moreell who has just retired from service. Those gentlemen have been doing peacetime jobs that were just as important as their wartime jobs.
We are looking forward now to a permanent peace. We believe that we are going to have a permanent peace. That is what we are working for. Nevertheless, we will still need the leadership which is being ingrained into you young gentlemen. Bear that in mind. Give the country the best you have, and no matter what they may say about you for wearing a uniform in the future, maintain that dignity that goes with the leadership that has made this country great, and then you will earn your salt which the Government is now giving you.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke from a balcony in Washington Hall at the U.S. Military Academy, West Point, N.Y., at 12:40 p.m. His opening words "General Taylor, General Higgins" referred to Maj. Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, Superintendent of the Academy, and Brig. Gen. Gerald J. Higgins, Commandant of the Cadet Corps.