Harry S. Truman
September 07, 1950

Remarks to the National Citizens' Committee for United Nations Day.
Mrs. Roosevelt, and members of this United Nations Committee:
It is a very great pleasure for me to have you here today, and it is also a very great pleasure to me to have received that first flag presented by these lovely 4-H girls. That pledge they made is a wonderful one, and I wish every citizen of the United States would take it. I am sure they will, in the long run, because the United Nations is our one hope to which we can look for a peaceful world. We must see that the United Nations itself is a successful and going organization.
The Government of the United States is trying by every means at its command to support the United Nations with all it has-men, arms, and efforts for peace.
We are carrying on this action in Korea for a peaceful world, not for conquest. We have no ambition in Asia except for a peaceful Asia. We have no ambition in Europe except for a peaceful Europe, and we have no ambition in South America except for a peaceful South America. That is our only ambition.
I hope that you will see that everybody in your community understands that our only interest in this whole situation is a peaceful world, where our children and our grandchildren--if we have any--may grow up and become citizens of the world, as well as citizens of this great Republic of ours.
You are doing a great work. I appreciate it. And I am very happy that Mrs. Roosevelt was here to make the presentation and to state what your ambitions are, and ours are. I thank you very much, Mrs. Roosevelt.
Note: The President spoke at 12:15 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt, chairman of the National Citizens' Committee for United Nations Day. Mrs. Roosevelt had introduced two 4-H Club members, Charlotte Ingrain and Mary Anne Long, who presented the President with a specially made United Nations flag.
The Committee, appointed by the Secretary of State to coordinate plans for the observance of United Nations Day (October 24), consisted of the heads of some 60 prominent national organizations.