Harry S. Truman
September 12, 1951

Remarks to the National Citizens' Committee for United Nations Day.
THIS IS a wonderful celebration. Most people who come to see the President come to get something. It seems that this organization has come to bring the President something that he appreciates very much.
This organization is doing a wonderful work for the peace of the world. You know, if people could understand the fundamentals on which the United Nations is founded, and could appreciate the fact that in order to maintain the peace of the world we must have an organization where we can negotiate our differences and work them out, instead of shooting them out as has been the case since the world began to today.
We still, unfortunately, are having to shoot out some of our differences. I hope that time will come to an end. That is what I have been working for since I have been President of the United States, to attain peace in the world. Nothing else matters, if we can make this world a good place to live in.
There is room enough for everybody. If the proper developments were pushed for the undeveloped sections of the world, we could maintain five times its present population in luxury.
And what you are doing is to get our country to understand what we are trying to do. I hope you keep up the good work. The very fact that in the old isolationist State of Nebraska you have got so many organizations interested in the United Nations shows that you are doing something worthwhile.
I hope you can sell it all over the country in exactly the same manner, because when people understand what it means, you don't have to do any talking to them; they will step right in and help you put it over.

Keep on.
Thank you very much for the cookbook. I have long ago quit talking about mama's cooking, because I have a good cook at home. And she also has made a good cook out of the musician who is our daughter. She can cook, too. I can't say that she likes to cook as well as she does to sing, but then she is able to do it.
And on my advice, I hope every young lady in the United States will learn to make cakes like this.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 12:10 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. He was presented with the first copy of a United Nations cookbook sponsored by the Committee ("The World's Favorite Recipes," Harper & Brothers, New York, 1951) and with a pound cake made from a recipe which Mrs. Truman had contributed for the book.
On the same day, the President signed Proclamation 2944 "United Nations Day, 1951" (3 CFR, 1949-1953 Comp., p. 129).