William J. Clinton
April 21, 2000

Executive Order 13148—Greening the Government Through Leadership in Environmental Management
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11001–11050) (EPCRA), the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 13101–13109) (PPA), the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401–7671q) (CAA), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 101. Federal Environmental Leadership. The head of each Federal agency is responsible for ensuring that all necessary actions are taken to integrate environmental accountability into agency day-to-day decisionmaking and long-term planning processes, across all agency missions, activities, and functions. Consequently, environmental management considerations must be a fundamental and integral component of Federal Government policies, operations, planning, and management. The head of each Federal agency is responsible for meeting the goals and requirements of this order.
Sec. 201. Environmental Management. Through development and implementation of environmental management systems, each agency shall ensure that strategies are established to support environmental leadership programs, policies, and procedures and that agency senior level managers explicitly and actively endorse these strategies.
Sec. 202. Environmental Compliance. Each agency shall comply with environmental regulations by establishing and implementing environmental compliance audit programs and policies that emphasize pollution prevention as a means to both achieve and maintain environmental compliance.
Sec. 203. Right-to-Know and Pollution Prevention. Through timely planning and reporting under the EPCRA, Federal facilities shall be leaders and responsible members of their communities by informing the public and their workers of possible sources of pollution resulting from facility operations. Each agency shall strive to reduce or eliminate harm to human health and the environment from releases of pollutants to the environment. Each agency shall advance the national policy that, whenever feasible and cost-effective, pollution should be prevented or reduced at the source. Funding for regulatory compliance programs shall emphasize pollution prevention as a means to address environmental compliance.
Sec. 204. Release Reduction: Toxic Chemicals. Through innovative pollution prevention, effective facility management, and sound acquisition and procurement practices, each agency shall reduce its reported Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) releases and off-site transfers of toxic chemicals for treatment and disposal by 10 percent annually, or by 40 percent overall by December 31, 2006.
Sec. 205. Use Reduction: Toxic Chemicals and Hazardous Substances and Other Pollutants. Through identification of proven substitutes and established facility management practices, including pollution prevention, each agency shall reduce its use of selected toxic chemicals, hazardous substances, and pollutants, or its generation of hazardous and radioactive waste types at its facilities by 50 percent by December 31, 2006. If an agency is unable to reduce the use of selected chemicals, that agency will reduce the use of selected hazardous substances or its generation of other pollutants, such as hazardous and radioactive waste types, at its facilities by 50 percent by December 31, 2006.
Sec. 206. Reductions in Ozone-Depleting Substances. Through evaluating present and future uses of ozone-depleting substances and maximizing the purchase and the use of safe, cost effective, and environmentally preferable alternatives, each agency shall develop a plan to phase out the procurement of Class I ozone-depleting substances for all nonexcepted uses by December 31, 2010.
Sec. 207. Environmentally and Economically Beneficial Landscaping. Each agency shall strive to promote the sustainable management of Federal facility lands through the implementation of cost-effective, environmentally sound landscaping practices, and programs to reduce adverse impacts to the natural environment.
Sec. 301. Annual Budget Submission. Federal agencies shall place high priority on obtaining funding and resources needed for implementation of the Greening the Government Executive Orders, including funding to address findings and recommendations from environmental management system audits or facility compliance audits conducted under sections 401 and 402 of this order. Federal agencies shall make such requests as required in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A–11.
Sec. 302. Application of Life Cycle Assessment Concepts. Each agency with facilities shall establish a pilot program to apply life cycle assessment and environmental cost accounting principles. To the maximum extent feasible and cost-effective, agencies shall apply those principles elsewhere in the agency to meet the goals and requirements of this order. Such analysis shall be considered in the process established in the OMB Capital Programming Guide and OMB Circular A–11. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in coordination with the Workgroup established in section 306 of this order, shall, to the extent feasible, assist agencies in identifying, applying, and developing tools that reflect life cycle assessment and environmental cost accounting principles and provide technical assistance to agencies in developing life cycle assessments and environmental cost accounting assessments under this Part.
Sec. 303. Pollution Prevention to Address Compliance. Each agency shall ensure that its environmental regulatory compliance funding policies promote the use of pollution prevention to achieve and maintain environmental compliance at the agency’s facilities. Agencies shall adopt a policy to preferentially use pollution prevention projects and activities to correct and prevent noncompliance with environmental regulatory requirements. Agency funding requests for facility compliance with Federal, State, and local environmental regulatory requirements shall emphasize pollution prevention through source reduction as the means of first choice to ensure compliance, with reuse and recycling alternatives having second priority as a means of compliance.
Sec. 304. Pollution Prevention Return-on-Investment Programs. Each agency shall develop and implement a pollution prevention program at its facilities that compares the life cycle costs of treatment and/or disposal of waste and pollutant streams to the life cycle costs of alternatives that eliminate or reduce toxic chemicals or pollutants at the source. Each agency shall implement those projects that are life-cycle cost-effective, or otherwise offer substantial environmental or economic benefits.
Sec. 305. Policies, Strategies, and Plans.
Sec. 307. Annual Reports. Each agency shall submit an annual progress report to the Administrator on implementation of this order. The reports shall include a description of the progress that the agency has made in complying with all aspects of this order, including, but not limited to, progress in achieving the reduction goals in sections 502, 503, and 505 of this order. Each agency may prepare and submit the annual report in electronic format. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the Federal Environmental Executive (FEE) by EPA for use in the biennial Greening the Government Report to the President prepared in accordance with Executive Order 13101. Within 9 months of the date of this order, EPA, in coordination with the Workgroup established under section 306 of this order, shall prepare guidance regarding the information and timing for the annual report. The Workgroup shall coordinate with those agencies responsible for Federal agency reporting guidance under the Greening the Government Executive orders to streamline reporting requirements and reduce agency and facility-level reporting burdens. The first annual report shall cover calendar year 2000 activities.
PART 4—PROMOTING ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND LEADERSHIP
Sec. 401. Agency and Facility Environmental Management Systems. To attain the goals of section 201 of this order:
Sec. 403. Environmental Leadership and Agency Awards Programs.
Sec. 404. Management Leadership and Performance Evaluations.
Sec. 405. Compliance Assistance.
Sec. 406. Compliance Assurance.
Sec. 407. Improving Environmental Management. To ensure that governmentwide goals for pollution prevention are advanced, each agency is encouraged to incorporate its environmental leadership goals into its Strategic and Annual Performance Plans required by the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, Public Law 103–62, starting with performance plans accompanying the FY 2002 budget.
Sec. 501. Toxics Release Inventory/Pollution Prevention Act Reporting. To attain the goals of section 203 of this order:
Sec. 503. Use Reduction: Toxic Chemicals, Hazardous Substances, and Other Pollutants. To attain the goals of section 205 of this order:
Sec. 504. Emergency Planning and Reporting Responsibilities. Each agency shall comply with the provisions set forth in sections 301 through 312 of the EPCRA, all implementing regulations, and any future amendments to these authorities, in light of any applicable guidance as provided by the EPA.
Sec. 505. Reductions in Ozone-Depleting Substances. To attain the goals of section 206 of this order:
Sec. 601. Implementation.
Sec. 602. Technical Assistance and Outreach. The EPA, the General Services Administration (GSA), and the USDA shall provide technical assistance in accordance with their respective authorities on environmentally and economically beneficial landscaping practices to agencies and their facilities.
Sec. 701. Limiting Procurement of Toxic Chemicals, Hazardous Substances, and Other Pollutants.
Sec. 702. Environmentally Benign Adhesives. Within 12 months after environmentally benign pressure sensitive adhesives for paper products become commercially available, each agency shall revise its specifications for paper products using adhesives and direct the purchase of paper products using those adhesives, whenever technically practicable and cost effective. Each agency should consider products using the environmentally benign pressure sensitive adhesives approved by the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) and listed on the USPS Qualified Products List for pressure sensitive recyclable adhesives.
Sec. 703. Ozone-Depleting Substances. Each agency shall follow the policies and procedures for the acquisition of items that contain, use, or are manufactured with ozone-depleting substances in accordance with FAR section 23.8 and other applicable FAR provisions.
Sec. 704. Environmentally and Economically Beneficial Landscaping Practices.
Sec. 801. National Security Exemptions. Subject to subsection 902(c) of this order and except as otherwise required by applicable law, in the interest of national security, the head of any agency may request from the President an exemption from complying with the provisions of any or all provisions of this order for particular agency facilities, provided that the procedures set forth in section 120(j)(1) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. 9620(j)(1)), are followed, with the following exceptions: (a) an exemption issued under this section will be for a specified period of time that may exceed 1 year;
Sec. 802. Compliance. After January 1, 2002, OMB, in consultation with the Chair of the Workgroup established by section 306 of this order, may modify the compliance requirements for an agency under this order, if the agency is unable to comply with the requirements of the order. An agency requesting modification must show that it has made substantial good faith efforts to comply with the order. The cost-effectiveness of implementation of the order can be a factor in OMB’s decision to modify the requirements for that agency’s compliance with the order.
Sec. 901. Revocation. Executive Order 12843 of April 21, 1993, Executive Order 12856 of August 3, 1993, the Executive Memorandum on Environmentally Beneficial Landscaping of April 26, 1994, Executive Order 12969 of August 8, 1995, and section 1–4. "Pollution Control Plan" of Executive Order 12088 of October 13, 1978, are revoked.
Sec. 902. Limitations.
Sec. 903. Community Outreach. Each agency is encouraged to establish a process for local community advice and outreach for its facilities relevant to aspects of this and other related Greening the Government Executive orders. All strategies and plans developed under this order shall be made available to the public upon request.
For purposes of this order:
Sec. 1001. General. Terms that are not defined in this part but that are defined in Executive Orders 13101 and 13123 have the meaning given in those Executive orders. For the purposes of Part 5 of this order all definitions in EPCRA and PPA and implementing regulations at 40 CFR Parts 370 and 372 apply.
Sec. 1002. "Administrator" means the Administrator of the EPA.
Sec. 1003. "Environmental cost accounting" means the modification of cost attribution systems and financial analysis practices specifically to directly track environmental costs that are traditionally hidden in overhead accounts to the responsible products, processes, facilities or activities.
Sec. 1004. "Facility" means any building, installation, structure, land, and other property owned or operated by, or constructed or manufactured and leased to, the Federal Government, where the Federal Government is formally accountable for compliance under environmental regulation (e.g., permits, reports/records and/or planning requirements) with requirements pertaining to discharge, emission, release, spill, or management of any waste, contaminant, hazardous chemical, or pollutant. This term includes a group of facilities at a single location managed as an integrated operation, as well as government owned contractor operated facilities.
Sec. 1005. "Environmentally benign pressure sensitive adhesives" means adhesives for stamps, labels, and other paper products that can be easily treated and removed during the paper recycling process.
Sec. 1006. "Ozone-depleting substance" means any substance designated as a Class I or Class II substance by EPA in 40 CFR Part 82.
Sec. 1007. "Pollution prevention" means "source reduction," as defined in the PPA, and other practices that reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants through: (a) increased efficiency in the use of raw materials, energy, water, or other resources; or (b) protection of natural resources by conservation.
Sec. 1008. "Greening the Government Executive orders" means this order and the series of orders on greening the government including Executive Order 13101 of September 14, 1998, Executive Order 13123 of June 3, 1999, Executive Order 13134 of August 12, 1999, and other future orders as appropriate.
Sec. 1009. "Environmental aspects" means the elements of an organization’s activities, products, or services that can interact with the environment.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

April 21, 2000.