William J. Clinton
April 21, 1993

Executive Order 12843—Procurement Requirements and Policies for Federal Agencies for Ozone-Depleting Substances
WHEREAS, the essential function of the stratospheric ozone layer is shielding the Earth from dangerous ultraviolet radiation; and
WHEREAS, the production and consumption of substances that cause the depletion of stratospheric ozone are being rapidly phased out on a worldwide basis with the support and encouragement of the United States; and
WHEREAS, the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, to which the United States is a signatory, calls for a phaseout of the production and consumption of these substances; and
WHEREAS, the Federal Government, as one of the principal users of these substances, is able through affirmative procurement practices to reduce significantly the use of these substances and to provide leadership in their phaseout; and
WHEREAS, the use of alternative substances and new technologies to replace these ozone-depleting substances may contribute positively to the economic competitiveness on the world market of U.S. manufacturers of these innovative safe alternatives;
NOW, THEREFORE, I, WILLIAM JEFFERSON CLINTON, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act ("Clean Air Act Amendments"), Public Law 101–549, and in order to reduce the Federal Government’s procurement and use of substances that cause stratospheric ozone depletion, do hereby order as follows:
Section 1. Federal Agencies. Federal agencies shall, to the extent practicable:
(e) "Recycling" is used to encompass recovery and reclamation, as well
as the reuse of controlled substances. Sec. 3. Policy. It is the policy of the Federal Government that Federal agencies: (i) implement cost-effective programs to minimize the procurement of materials and substances that contribute to the depletion of stratospheric ozone; and (ii) give preference to the procurement of alternative chemicals, products, and manufacturing processes that reduce overall risks to human health and the environment by lessening the depletion of ozone in the upper atmosphere. In implementing this policy, prior to final promulgation of EPA regulations on Federal procurement, Federal agencies shall begin conforming their procurement policies to the general requirements of Title VI of the Clean Air Act Amendments by:
(iii) requiring that new contracts provide that any acquired products containing or manufactured with Class I or Class II substances be labeled in accordance with section 611 of the Clean Air Act Amendments.
Sec. 4. Responsibilities. Not later than 6 months after the effective date of this Executive order, each Federal agency, where feasible, shall have in place practices that, where economically practicable, minimize the procurement of Class I substances. Agencies also shall be aware of the phaseout schedule for Class II substances. Agency practices may include, but are not limited to:
(a) altering existing equipment and/or procedures to make use of safe alternatives;
(b) specifying the use of safe alternatives and of goods and services, where available, that do not require the use of Class I substances in new procurements and that limit the use of Class II substances consistent with section 612 of the Clean Air Act Amendments; and
(c) amending existing contracts, to the extent permitted by law and where
practicable, to require the use of safe alternatives. Sec. 5. Reporting Requirements. Not later than 6 months after the effective date of this Executive order, each Federal agency shall submit to the Office of Management and Budget a report regarding the implementation of this order. The report shall include a certification by each agency that its regulations and procurement practices are being amended to comply with this order.
Sec. 6.Exceptions. Exceptions to compliance with this Executive order may be made in accordance with section 604 of the Clean Air Act Amendments and with the provisions of the Montreal Protocol.
Sec. 7. Effective Date. This Executive order is effective 30 days after the date of issuance. Although full implementation of this order must await revisions to the Federal Acquisition Regulations ("FAR"), it is expected that Federal agencies will take all appropriate actions in the interim to implement those aspects of the order that are not dependent upon regulatory revision.
Sec. 8. Federal Acquisition Regulatory Councils. Pursuant to section 6(a) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act, as amended, 41 U.S.C. 405(a), the Defense Acquisition Regulatory Council and the Civilian Agency Acquisition Council shall ensure that the policies established herein are incorporated in the FAR within 180 days from the date this order is issued.
Sec. 9. Judicial Review. This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by a non-Federal party against the United States, its officers or employees, or any other person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

April 21, 1993.