William J. Clinton
April 27, 2000

Executive Order 13151—Global Disaster Information Network
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to establish a Global Disaster Information Network to use information technology more effectively to reduce loss of life and property from natural and man-made disasters, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. (a) It is the policy of this Administration to use information technology more effectively to coordinate the Federal Government’s collection and dissemination of information to appropriate response agencies and State governments to prepare for and respond to natural and man-made disasters (disasters). As a result of changing population demographics in our coastal, rural, and urban areas over the past decades, the loss of life and property (losses) from disasters has nearly doubled. One of the ways the Federal Government can reduce these losses is to use technology more effectively to coordinate its collection and dissemination (hereafter referred to collectively as "provision") of information which can be used in both planning for and recovering from disasters. While many agencies provide disasterrelated information, they may not always provide it in a coordinated manner. To improve the provision of disaster-related information, the agencies shall, as set out in this order, use information technology to coordinate the Federal Government’s provision of information to prepare for, respond to, and recover from domestic disasters.
Sec. 2. Establishment. (a) There is established an Interagency Coordinating Committee (Committee) to provide leadership and oversight for the development of the Network. The Office of the Vice President, the Department of Commerce through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Department of State, respectively, shall designate a representative to serve as Co-chairpersons of the Committee. The Committee membership shall comprise representatives from the following departments and agencies:
Network. Sec. 4. Implementation. (a) The Committee, with the assistance of the Support Office, shall address national and international issues associated with the development of the Network within the context of:
Sec. 5. Tribal Governments. This order does not impose any requirements on tribal governments.
Sec. 6. Judicial Review. This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by law, by a party against the United States, its officers, its employees, or any other person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

April 27, 2000.