William J. Clinton
December 28, 2000

Executive Order 13185—To Strengthen the Federal Government-University Research Partnership
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to keep the Federal Government-University research partnership strong, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Principles of the Government-University Partnership. The partnership in science and technology that has evolved between the Federal Government and American universities has yielded benefits that are vital to each. It continues to prove exceptionally productive, successfully promoting the discovery of knowledge, stimulating technological innovation, improving the quality of life, educating and training the next generation of scientists and engineers, and contributing to America’s economic prosperity and national security. In order to reaffirm and strengthen this partnership, this order sets forth the following guiding and operating principles that are fully described in the April 1999 National Science and Technology Council report, "Renewing the Government-University Partnership." These principles shall provide the framework for the development and analysis of all future Federal policies, rules, and regulations for the Federal Government-University research partnership.
Sec. 2. Office of Science and Technology (OSTP) Review of the Government-University Research Partnership. (a) The OSTP, in conjunction with the National Science and Technology Council, shall conduct a regular review of the Government-University research partnership and prepare a report on the status of the partnership. The OSTP should receive input from all departments or agencies that have a major impact on the Government-University partnership through their support of research and education, policy making, regulatory activities, and research administra tion. In addition, OSTP may seek the input of the National Science Board and the President’s Committee of Advisors for Science and Technology, as well as other stakeholders, such as State and local governments, industry, the National Academy of Sciences, and the Federal Demonstration Partnership.
(b) The purpose of the review and the report is to determine the overall health of the Government-University research partnership, being mindful of the guiding and operating principles stated above. The report should include recommendations on how to improve the Government- University partnership.
(c) The Director of OSTP shall deliver the report to the President.
Sec. 3. Judicial Review. This order does not create any enforceable rights against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

December 28, 2000.