William J. Clinton
January 18, 2001

Executive Order 13195—Trails for America in the 21st Century
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in furtherance of purposes of the National Trails System Act of 1968, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1241–1251), the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (Public Law 105–178), and other pertinent statutes, and to achieve the common goal of better establishing and operating America’s national system of trails, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Federal Agency Duties. Federal agencies will, to the extent permitted by law and where practicable—and in cooperation with Tribes, States, local governments, and interested citizen groups—protect, connect, promote, and assist trails of all types throughout the United States. This will be accomplished by:
Sec. 3. Issue Resolution and Handbook for Federal Administrators of the National Trails System. Federal agencies shall together develop a process for resolving interagency issues concerning trails. In addition, reflecting the authorities of the National Trails System Act, participating agencies shall coordinate preparation of (and updates for) an operating handbook for Federal administrators of the National Trails System and others involved in creating a national system of trails. The handbook shall reflect each agencies’ governing policies and provide guidance to each agencies’ field staff and partners about the roles and responsibilities needed to make each trail in the national system fully operational.
Sec. 4. Observance of Existing Laws. Nothing in this Executive Order shall be construed to override existing laws, including those that protect the lands, waters, wildlife habitats, wilderness areas, and cultural values of this Nation.
Sec. 5. Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch. It does not create any right or benefit,
substantive or procedural, enforceable in law or equity by any party against the United States, its agencies, its officers or employees, or any other person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

January 18, 2001.