William J. Clinton
January 10, 2001

Executive Order 13187—The Presidents Disability Employment Partnership Board
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), and in order to promote the employment of people with disabilities, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment and Composition of the Board. (a) There is hereby established the President’s Disability Employment Partnership Board (Board).
(d) Members and the Chairperson may be reappointed for subsequent
terms and may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. Sec. 2. Functions. (a) The Board shall provide advice and information to the President, the Vice President, the Secretary of Labor, and other appropriate Federal officials with respect to facilitating the employment of people with disabilities, and shall assist in other activities that promote the formation of public-private partnerships, the use of economic incentives, the provision of technical assistance regarding entrepreneurship, and other actions that may enhance employment opportunities for people with disabilities.
(b) In carrying out paragraph (a) of this section, the Board shall:
(iii) coordinate with the Office of Disability Employment Policy in the Department of Labor in promoting the collaborative use of public and private resources to assist people with disabilities in forming and expanding small business concerns and in enhancing their access to Federal procurement and other relevant business opportunities. Public resources include those of the Department of Labor, the Small Business Administration, the Department of Commerce, the Department of Education, the Department of Defense, the Department of Treasury, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Federal Communications Commission, and of executive departments and agency offices responsible for small, disadvantaged businesses utilization.
(c) The Board shall submit annual written reports to the President, who may apprise the Congress and other interested organizations and individuals
on its activities, progress, and problems relating to maximizing employment opportunities for people with disabilities.
U.S.C. 5701–5707).
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

January 10, 2001.