William J. Clinton
January 18, 2001

Executive Order 13193—Federal Leadership on Global Tobacco Control and Prevention
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. It shall be the policy of the executive branch to take strong action to address the potential global epidemic of diseases caused by tobacco use. The executive branch shall undertake activities to increase its capacity to address global tobacco prevention and control issues through coordinated domestic action, limited bilateral assistance to individual nations, and support to multilateral organizations. International activities shall be directed towards deterring children from tobacco use, protecting nonsmokers, and providing information about the adverse health effects of tobacco use and the health benefits of cessation.
Sec. 2. Responsibilities of Federal Departments and Agencies. (a) Tobacco Trade Policy. In the implementation of international trade policy, executive departments and agencies shall not promote the sale or export of tobacco or tobacco products, or seek the reduction or removal of foreign government restrictions on the marketing and advertising of such products, provided that such restrictions are applied equally to all tobacco or tobacco products of the same type. Departments and agencies are not precluded from taking necessary actions in accordance with the requirements and remedies available under applicable United States trade laws and international agreements to ensure nondiscriminatory treatment of United States products. Nothing in this Executive Order shall be construed (1) to modify the annual executive branch guidance to United States diplomatic posts on health, trade, and commercial aspects of tobacco, or (2) to affect any negotiating position of the United States on the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.
on smoking rates, particularly among women and children. Such assessment shall be prepared and provided to interested agencies and other parties not later than December 31, 2001, and be updated as practicable.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

January 18, 2001.