William J. Clinton
January 10, 2001

Executive Order 13186—Responsibilities of Federal Agencies To Protect Migratory Birds
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in furtherance of the purposes of the migratory bird conventions, the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (16 U.S.C. 703–711), the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Acts (16 U.S.C. 668–668d), the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (16 U.S.C. 661–666c), the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531–1544), the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321–4347), and other pertinent statutes, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. Migratory birds are of great ecological and economic value to this country and to other countries. They contribute to biological diversity and bring tremendous enjoyment to millions of Americans who study, watch, feed, or hunt these birds throughout the United States and other countries. The United States has recognized the critical importance of this shared resource by ratifying international, bilateral conventions for the conservation of migratory birds. Such conventions include the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds with Great Britain on behalf of Canada 1916, the Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds and Game Mammals-Mexico 1936, the Convention for the Protection of Birds and Their Environment- Japan 1972, and the Convention for the Conservation of Migratory Birds and Their Environment-Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1978.
These migratory bird conventions impose substantive obligations on the United States for the conservation of migratory birds and their habitats, and through the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (Act), the United States has implemented these migratory bird conventions with respect to the United States. This Executive Order directs executive departments and agencies to take certain actions to further implement the Act.
Sec. 2. Definitions. For purposes of this order:
in the agency-specific Memoranda of Understanding required by this order. Actions delegated to or assumed by nonfederal entities, or carried out by nonfederal entities with Federal assistance, are not subject to this order. Such actions, however, continue to be subject to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.
U.S. National Shorebird Plan, North American Waterfowl Management Plan, North American Colonial Waterbird Plan, and other planning efforts, as well as guidance from other sources, including the Food and Agricultural
Organization’s International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries;
(g) Each agency shall advise the public of the availability of its MOU
through a notice published in the Federal Register. Sec. 4. Council for the Conservation of Migratory Birds. (a) The Secretary of Interior shall establish an interagency Council for the Conservation of Migratory Birds (Council) to oversee the implementation of this order. The Council’s duties shall include the following: (1) sharing the latest resource information to assist in the conservation and management of migratory birds;
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

January 10, 2001.