William J. Clinton
May 06, 1997

Declaration of Mexican and United States Alliance Against Drugs
Drug abuse and drug trafficking are a danger to our societies, an affront to our sovereignty and a threat to our national security. We declare our nations united in an alliance to combat this menace.
With trust in one another and in our commitment as Chiefs of State, our collaboration will go forward based on the following fundamental principles: a) absolute respect for the sovereignty and territorial jurisdiction of Mexico and the United States; b) shared responsibility for confronting the problem of illegal drugs and related crimes, such as illegal arms trafficking and money laundering; c) adoption of an integrated approach against illegal drugs, which will confront the problem from the demand and supply side simultaneously; d) balance and reciprocity in the actions, programs and rules developed to confront the drug threat in both countries; and e) effective application of the laws in both countries.
Our governments have issued a joint threat assessment detailing the nature of illegal drug use in both our societies, and the extent of drug trafficking and related crimes as they threaten both our peoples. Mexico and the United States are fully agreed on the magnitude of the problem in both countries, and are determined to combat it with all resources at our disposal.
Accordingly, we have instructed our responsible Cabinet Officers, acting through the U.S./ Mexico High Level Contact Group for Drug Control, to work out a common counterdrug strategy, and to develop mutually reinforcing implementation plans for this common strategy, consistent with each other's National Drug Control Programs.
Acting together in accordance with this political commitment, and working to enhance trust, mutual support and confidence, Mexico and the United States will:
Our Alliance's counterdrug strategy, along with respective plans of operations for its implementation shall be completed by the end of the year. Prior to that we will meet again with our respective responsible Cabinet Officers to resolve any outstanding issues, and review the progress in our cooperation.
In pursuance of this Alliance Against Drugs, we hereby pledge the fullest support of ourselves and of our governments to construct drug free societies for the twenty-first century.
WILLIAM J. CLINTON, President
The United State of America
ERNESTO ZEDILLO PONCE DE LEÓN, President
Federal Republic of Mexico
NOTE: An original was not available for verification of the content of this declaration.