William J. Clinton
May 18, 1998

United States/European Union Declaration on Common Orientation of Nonproliferation Policy
The International Non-Proliferation Regime
The United States and the Member States of the European Union share a strong common interest in non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems.
The United States and the European Union support universal adherence to international treaties covering weapons of mass destruction, including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. They are cooperating to ensure full and effective implementation of these treaties. This includes the effective implementation of the recently-strengthened safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency and verification procedures being implemented pursuant to the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. They are also working toward agreement on an effective Protocol on verification for the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention.
They are active participants in international export control regimes and arrangements:
—The Nuclear Suppliers Group.
—The Zangger Committee of countries committed to cooperation in interpretation and implementation of the export clause (Article III.2) of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
—The Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR).
—The Australia Group of suppliers of goods and dual-use equipment potentially relevant to chemical or biological weapons.
Among their other responsibilities, the regimes provide mechanisms for the exchange of information about programs and activities of concern in the area of weapons proliferation which they address.
Export Control Policy
While promoting international trade and opportunities, and consistent with other relevant international obligations, the United States and the European Union take as a particularly important objective the denial of assistance to programs of weapons of mass destruction and means of delivery. This includes dual-use goods and technology subject to export control. The United States and European Union Member States have adopted policies and given guidance to licensing officials to prevent any export of controlled goods when they believe they might be used in programs of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. In this context, they should take into account, inter alia, evidence of an importer's prior association with such programs.
The European Union has adopted a comprehensive legally-binding Dual-Use Regime of export controls which contains stringent catchall provisions covering equipment that might be used in or in connection with programs of weapons of mass destruction.
Regions of Proliferation Concern
The United States and the European Union have discussed regions of proliferation concern, including the Middle East and South Asia.
In this context, the United States and the European Union have recently noted their continuing serious concern about efforts by some countries in the Middle East and South Asia to acquire missile technology and their capability to produce weapons of mass destruction. The European Union noted that such concerns should figure into its political contacts with these countries, notably Iran.
The United States and the European Union reaffirmed their support of the work of UNSCOM in ensuring Iraq's implementation of UN Security Council Resolutions on the elimination of its weapons of mass destruction.
United States-European Union Consultations and Information Exchange
The United States and the European Union hold regular consultations on non-proliferation and will strengthen their close ties in this field.
The two sides also recognize that effective implementation of export controls will be greatly enhanced by the timely exchange of any relevant information about programs and activities of concern. To strengthen existing cooperation in this area, the two sides have agreed to:
—Additional information sharing in their regular meetings;
—Give further consideration, including the appropriate involvement of experts, of proposals to establish improved communications and data transmissions relevant to non-proliferation export controls. Due consideration will be given to practical aspects of this concept.
—Enhanced bilateral information exchanges.
Political Action With Suppliers
The United States and European Union countries have engaged key suppliers. Several European leaders and Foreign Ministers have raised their concern directly with their Russian counterparts about Russian technological assistance to Iran's ballistic missile program. These concerns have been reinforced in contacts between the European Union troika and Russian counterparts. The United States and European Union welcome actions taken by Russia to strengthen its export control regime.
The United States is open to a trilateral meeting with European Union and Russia on nonproliferation issues, but believes that careful preparation will be needed for such a meeting to be useful.
Agenda for Further Cooperation
The United States and European Union intend to continue working closely together to advance their common non-proliferation objectives. Some items on the agenda of work in the coming year are:
—Coordination of export control assistance programs to third countries. Exchanges of information about ongoing programs have already occurred.
—Cooperation to improve export control implementation.
—Consultation to ensure that intangible technology transfers do not contribute to proliferation. Ideas in this area have been advanced by both sides.
—Best practice in export control implementation, including discussion of means to strengthen verification of end-use and to prevent diversion through third countries. Controls of non-linked items (catch-all), software and technology.
NOTE: This declaration was made available by the Office of the Press Secretary on May 18 but was not issued as a White House press release. An original was not available for verification of the content of this declaration.