William J. Clinton
November 15, 1996

Executive Order 13027—Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate a Dispute Between the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority and Its Employees Represented by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers
A dispute exists between Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority and certain of its employees represented by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers.
The dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) (the "Act").
A party empowered by the Act has requested that the President establish a second emergency board pursuant to section 9A of the Act (45 U.S.C. 159a).
Section 9A(e) of the Act provides that the President, upon such request, shall appoint a second emergency board to investigate and report on the dispute.
Now, Therefore, by the authority vested in me as President, by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 9A of the Act, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment of the Board. There is established effective 12:01 a.m., eastern standard time, on November 16, 1996, a board of three members to be appointed by the President to investigate this dispute. No member shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The board shall perform its functions subject to the availability of funds.
Sec. 2. Report. Within 30 days after creation of the board, the parties to the dispute shall submit to the board final offers for settlement of the dispute. Within 30 days after submission of final offers for settlement of the dispute, the board shall submit a report to the President setting forth its selection of the most reasonable offer.
Sec. 3. Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 9A(h) of the Act, from the time a request to establish a board is made until 60 days after the board makes its report, no change, except by agreement, shall be made by the parties in the conditions out of which the dispute arose.
Sec. 4. Records Maintenance. The records and files of the board are records of the Office of the President and upon the board's termination shall be maintained in the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.
Sec. 5. Expiration. The board shall terminate upon submission of the report provided for in section 2 of this order.
William J. Clinton

The White House,

November 15, 1996.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., November 19, 1996]