William J. Clinton
October 01, 1993

Executive Order 12871—Labor-Management Partnerships
The involvement of Federal Government employees and their union representatives is essential to achieving the National Performance Review’s Government reform objectives. Only by changing the nature of Federal labormanagement relations so that managers, employees, and employees’ elected union representatives serve as partners will it be possible to design and implement comprehensive changes necessary to reform Government. Labormanagement partnerships will champion change in Federal Government agencies to transform them into organizations capable of delivering the highest quality services to the American people.
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to establish a new form of labor-management relations throughout the executive branch to promote the principles and recommendations adopted as a result of the National Performance Review, it is hereby ordered:
Section 1. The National Partnership Council.
(a) Establishment and Membership. There is established the National Partnership Council ("Council"). The Council shall comprise the following members appointed by the President:
Members shall have 2-year terms on the Council, which may be extended by the President.
(b) Responsibilities and Functions. The Council shall advise the President on matters involving labor-management relations in the executive branch. Its activities shall include:
of a flexible and responsive hiring system and the reform of the General Schedule classification system;
U.S.C. App. 2).
Sec. 2. Implementation of Labor-Management Partnerships Throughout the Executive Branch. The head of each agency subject to the provisions of chapter 71 of title 5, United States Code shall:
(d) negotiate over the subjects set forth in 5 U.S.C. 7106(b)(1), and instruct subordinate officials to do the same; and
(e) evaluate progress and improvements in organizational performance
resulting from the labor-management partnerships. Sec. 3. No Administrative or Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right to administrative or judicial review, or any other right, substantive or procedural, enforceable by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

October 1, 1993.