William J. Clinton
October 27, 2000

Executive Order 13174—Commission on Workers, Communities, and Economic Change in the New Economy
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment. There is established the "Commission on Workers, Communities, and Economic Change in the New Economy" (Commission). The Commission shall be composed of up to 14 persons to be appointed by the President from individuals who represent State or local agencies relating to workforce or community development, economists or other workforce development experts, labor organizations, business leaders, and Members of Congress. The President shall designate a Chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
Sec. 2. Functions. The Commission shall conduct a study of matters relating to economic dislocation, and worker and community adjustment to such dislocations. In carrying out this study, the Commission shall examine:
tating worker adjustment to rapidly changing economic circumstances. Sec. 3. Report. Not later than 12 months after the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and the Congress a report that contains a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission’s study carried out under section 2 of this order, and includes:
that the Commission determines to be appropriate. Sec. 4. Administration. (a) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation for their work on the Commission. While engaged in the work of the Commission, members appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
(b) The Department of Labor shall provide the Commission with funding and administrative support. The Commission may have paid staff. In addition, appropriate Federal agencies may be requested to designate staff to assist with the work of the Commission. The Secretary of Labor shall perform the functions of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.), except that of reporting to the Congress, in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the Administrator of General Services.
Sec. 5. General Provisions. The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its report.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

October 27, 2000.