William J. Clinton
September 02, 1998

Memorandum of Understanding Between the United States of America and Russian Federation on the Principles of Cooperation in the Fields of Culture, the Humanities, the Social Sciences, Education, and the Mass Media
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Russian Federation (hereinafter referred to as "the Participants");
Desiringto enhance mutual understanding and strengthen the friendly relations between the peoples of the United States of America and the Russian Federation;
Believingthat further development of cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit will facilitate attainment of these objectives;
Reaffirmingthe enduring validity of the principle of compliance with the international norms governing rights to intellectual property;
Guided Bythe provisions of the Charter for American-Russian Partnership and Friendship signed at Washington on June 17, 1992; and
Declaringtheir intent to encourage direct ties between the citizens and appropriate institutions of the United States of America and the Russian Federation, as well as between the U.S. and Russian non-governmental institutions, in the fields of culture the humanities, the social sciences, education, and the mass media;
Have reached mutual understanding that:
1. The Participants intend to promote the strengthening of mutual cooperation in the fields of culture, the humanities, the social sciences, education, archival science, and the mass media.
2. The Participants intend to encourage the development of cultural exchanges in order to promote better understanding of each other's culture, particularly through:
3. The Participants intend to facilitate the establishment of contacts between interested governmental and non-governmental organizations in order to develop programs and joint projects in fields of mutual interest that help strengthen bilateral ties.
4. The Participants plan to encourage scholarly research in the fields of culture, the humanities, and education conducted by appropriate academic institutions in the two countries.
5. The Participants intend to provide assistance in the study of the Russian and English languages in the United States of America and the Russian Federation, respectively.
6. The Participants intend to facilitate the reciprocal sending of pupils, undergraduate and graduate students, faculty, and scholars for instruction and scholarly research, as well as high school teachers to work as interns and give lectures.
7. The Participants intend to encourage the development of contacts between libraries and archives in order to provide wider access to the information available in them.
8. The Participants intend to facilitate exchanges and contacts between journalists, publishers, and mass media associations.
9. The Participants intend to encourage contacts and cooperation between youth, women's, and other non-governmental organizations in the two countries.
10. The activities set forth in this Memorandum may be carried out in the form of joint projects or individual programs of appropriate governmental or non-governmental organizations in the United States of America and the Russian Federation.
11. The Participants plan for their representatives to meet as necessary or at the request of either Participant to exchange views and also to formulate recommendations on specific aspects of the development of cultural cooperation. Matters relating to this will be coordinated through diplomatic channels.
12. In matters pertaining to cooperation in the fields of culture, the humanities, the social sciences, education, and the mass media, the Participants intend to be guided by this Memorandum in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America and the Russian Federation and in accordance with the principles and norms of international law, beginning on the date of its signature and until such time as either Participant informs the other in writing to the contrary.
The provisions of this Memorandum do not affect other active projects or programs.
Signedat Moscow, this second day of September, 1998, in duplicate, each in the English and Russian languages.
For the Government of the United States of America:
William J. Clinton
For the Government of the Russian Federation:
Boris Yeltsin
NOTE: An original was not available for verification of the content of this memorandum.