Harry S. Truman
April 08, 1949

Remarks at a Supper for the Jefferson-Jackson Day Executive Committee.
Mr. Chairmen--and distinguished Democrats:
I do appreciate most highly what you have done in this campaign for the sinews of war for the Democratic Party. I am not used to figures like that, personally or as a Democrat. As President of the United States they are small change.
I never in my life ran for office that the Democrats didn't have a deficit to start with, and wind up with a deficit when they got through. I have been through some very excruciating campaigns in the great State of Missouri, and one that I remember very distinctly, at the end of the 2d of November, in which the finances have been minus.
But that didn't have any serious effect on the welfare of the Democratic Party, or on the winning ability of the fellow who had to win.
I am exceedingly happy that you have been able to arrange a situation which will give the party a financial background with which to win in 1950, because that election must be won. It is important.
We have a program which we expect to put over. That program is progressing successfully and satisfactorily, and after the next session of the Congress we can go to the country and say what we have done, and what we hope to do, and what we will do, when we elect the Congress in 1950.
I do appreciate most highly what you have done. I can't tell you how much I appreciate it, because if you had been in my financial condition all your life, you would more than appreciate it.
I have been wanting to tell all of you how much I am indebted to you for all the efforts which you have put forth before November the 2d, and for all the efforts which you have been putting forth to make these Jefferson-Jackson dinners a success. And they have been a success, if I can understand the figures which the chairman of the National Committee has furnished you with.
It is a pleasure to me always to meet with Democrats. It is a pleasure to me always to look into the faces of people who are interested in the welfare of the country, in the welfare of the people, as people--who are not interested in representing special interests in government.
It is a privilege for me to serve with you for the people of the United States of America, for the people of the world, and for the peace of the world.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 7:35 p.m. in the Sapphire Room of the Mayflower Hotel in Washington. In his opening remarks he referred to Senator J. Howard McGrath, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and Wilson Wyatt, chairman of the meeting.