Harry S. Truman
April 28, 1952

Statement by the President on the Termination of the State of War With Japan.
WITH THE deposit of the United States ratification which brings into force the Treaty of Peace with Japan, the state of war has been terminated and Japan has been restored to a status of sovereign equality in the society of free peoples. This great event is especially gratifying to the Government and people of the United States who have worked in close association with the Government and people of Japan for its restoration as a prosperous and progressive nation. This common effort has strengthened the essential bonds of friendship between our two peoples.
The Treaty of Peace terminates the Allied occupation of Japan and with it the entire regime of control and opens a new era in Japan's history. During the past 6 years, the Japanese people and Government have worked to build a democratic and peace-loving nation with a sincerity and earnestness that has won them the respect of the world. The Treaty of Peace affords Japan an opportunity to make a great contribution to world peace and progress.
Japan takes her rightful place of equality and honor among the free nations of the world at a time when Communist imperialism, having already enslaved large areas and many unfortunate peoples, is seeking to extend its system of tyranny and exploitation by direct and indirect aggression. We are confident that the people of Japan are alert to this danger and are ready and willing to play their full part in meeting the common menace. For their part, the American people will continue to work with the people of Japan to promote peace and security in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. To this end, simultaneously with the coming into effect of the Treaty of Peace, the United States has exchanged ratifications with Japan, and thus also brought into concurrent effect, the Security Treaty between the United States of America and Japan.
Note: On the same day, the President signed Proclamation 2974 "Termination of the National Emergencies Proclaimed on September 8, 1939, and May 27, 1941" (3 CFR, 1949-1953 Comp., p. 158).
See also Item 95.