Harry S. Truman
April 15, 1949

Statement by the President Commending the National Capital Sesquicentennial Commission.
IN MARCH 1948, at the first meeting of the National Capital Sesquicentennial Commission, which was created by Congress to plan the celebration of the 150th birthday anniversary of our Nation's Capital, I said: "It is a matter of importance to all citizens of the United States and a symbol to freedom loving people everywhere." That statement has even more pertinent application now than a year ago.
The Commission, under the authority granted to it by the Congress, has created a sound program for the observance of this important event in our American history-one which I believe will bring home to every American, and to the world, the full significance of our great heritage of freedom.
I believe the exposition planned by the Commission offers a timely opportunity for all elements of our national life to demonstrate the achievements of our free enterprise system, on a site in the heart of the Capital. I hope that all our States and Territories, industry, labor, and all Government agencies and departments will respond wholeheartedly to our invitation to participate.
I can think of no more appropriate name for this important celebration than the Freedom Fair--and I urge all Americans to help in making it a symbol of America's faith in the democratic principles upon which our Nation was rounded.
Note: The National Capital Sesquicentennial Commission was established in 1947 (61 Stat. 396). At the time of the President's statement, however, Congress had not appropriated funds for the celebration, scheduled to begin in April 1950, and the House Appropriations Committee had stricken from the budget the item relating to the sesquicentennial (see Item 72 above). Funds were provided in a supplemental appropriations bill approved October 14, 1949 (63 Stat. 872).
For the President's remarks at the first meeting of the National Capital Sesquicentennial Commission on March 8, 1948, see 1948 volume, this series, Item 47.