Harry S. Truman
April 20, 1951

Remarks to a Group of British Publishers and Editors.
WELL, it is a pleasure to be able to receive you gentlemen this morning. I first of all want to say to you how greatly we suffered from the loss of Mr. Bevin. I became personally acquainted with him at Potsdam. He was there as a part of the English delegation and he came later as Foreign Secretary. He has been over here I think on three different occasions in which I had very close association with him and became one of his admirers. I think we suffered a great loss when he had to give up, although I am certain his working policies will be carried on by his successors.
I think one of the ways in which our understandings can be clarified and we can go ahead with the necessary things we have to do as partners in the United Nations and in the world is a complete understanding of each other. I understand you have 50 men stationed in this part of the world, and we have an equal number or more in Great Britain furnishing us the same information. One great thing about our association, we speak the same language, or substantially. Our western twang is not thoroughly understood and sometimes we are stumped by some of British speech. But we have the same ideals in mind as to government and welfare of the people, and I hope that that understanding will continue to be clarified and we of necessity will continue to carry out our mutual obligations under the Atlantic Treaty and the United Nations.
I think our only hope for world peace is the working out of the United Nations Charter so it is a practical thing and a living thing. It took Great Britain a long, long time to get what they finally came up with as their Constitution. It took us 80 years. We go through many woes and travail before we finally get this thing to work, but those of us who know what we are after should never give up, and I know the British are famous for their bulldog stubbornness. I hope you come back.
Note: The President spoke at 12 noon in his office at the White House. In the course of his remarks he referred to Ernest Bevin, former Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom, who died in London on April 14, 1951.