Harry S. Truman
April 18, 1951

Statement by the President on the Security of the Far East.
THE UNITED STATES is moving steadily forward in concert with other countries of the Pacific in its determination to make ever stronger the position of the free world in the Pacific Ocean area.
In connection with the reestablishment of peace with Japan, we are discussing with the Japanese Government the implementation of its expressed desire for a post-treaty security arrangement pursuant to which United States Armed Forces might on a provisional basis remain in and about Japan.
The United States maintains, and expects to continue to maintain, its Armed Forces in the Ryukyus, particularly at Okinawa.
In the Philippines the United States is accorded certain military operating rights and facilities pursuant to an agreement with the Government of the Philippines and the whole world knows that the United States recognizes that an armed attack on the Philippines would be looked upon by the United States as dangerous to its own peace and safety and that it would act accordingly.
The Governments of Australia and New Zealand, in connection with the reestablishment of peace with Japan, have suggested an arrangement between them and the United States, pursuant to Articles 51 and 52 of the United Nations Charter which would make dear that in the event of an armed attack upon any one of them in the Pacific, each of the three would act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes; and which would establish consultation to strengthen security on the basis of continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid.
The possibilities of such an arrangement were fully explored by Mr. Dulles at Canberra, Australia, and Wellington, New Zealand, and have since been informally discussed with the appropriate subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House.
I have now asked the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and Mr. Dulles, as my special representative in relation to the Japanese peace settlement and related matters, to pursue this matter further concurrently with the prosecution of the other negotiations necessary to bring the Japanese peace settlement to an early and satisfactory conclusion.
The series of arrangements and dispositions outlined above, will strengthen the fabric of peace in the whole Pacific Ocean area, where security is strongly influenced by sea and air power. They constitute natural initial steps in the consolidation of peace in that area and also will contribute to the building of universal peace as sought by the United Nations and under which great goal the efforts of our Nation are now being largely dedicated.
Note: The White House issued releases on February 27, April 11, May 3, and June 15, 1951, announcing that John Foster Dulles, Consultant to the Secretary of State, had reported to the President on his discussions in Japan, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, France, and the United Kingdom preparatory to the conclusion of a peace treaty with Japan.
Mr. Dulles pointed out that although there had been initial differences of opinion on important matters, these had all been cleared away, and a draft treaty had been prepared. The President expressed gratification at the progress which had been made and the enlargement of the area of agreement in relation to the prompt conclusion of a fair and just Japanese Peace Treaty.