Harry S. Truman
April 02, 1951

Statement by the President on the Third Anniversary of the European Recovery Program.
ON THIS third anniversary, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you who have carried out so well the aims of the European recovery program.
When General Marshall first made his proposal, the shadow of economic collapse, with its attendant evils of unemployment, of hunger and political unrest, hung over the countries of Western Europe. The great question in 1947 was whether free institutions could survive.
Today, thanks primarily to their own efforts, the people of Western Europe, together with our help, have rebuilt the economies of their countries and have developed a new spirit of confidence in themselves and in their free institutions. To my mind, this spirit, this rising confidence in the hearts of the people, is one of the greatest sources of strength in the free world.
By working together, economic recovery has been substantially achieved. However, with the present threat to world peace, new tasks have been imposed upon us. The free nations are now combining to convert their resources into military strength to preserve the peace and defend our freedoms.
The splendid organization which has been developed under the Economic Cooperation Administration can make an important contribution in helping develop this strength. Accordingly, I intend to recommend to the Congress that ECA be maintained on a continuing basis to help carry out the programs essential to the security of the free world.
There is much to be done in Europe, in Asia, and in other parts of the world to help the free countries build their military, economic, and spiritual defenses against aggression from without and subversion from within. One of our essential objectives is to develop, in cooperation with other free nations, an expanding world economy, the benefits of which can be shared by us all.
On this anniversary, I extend to all of you my sincere thanks for what you have done. I am confident that in its new tasks the ECA will continue to make a vital contribution in helping to build the strength of the free world upon which security and freedom rest.
Note: The statement was read for the President by W. Averell Harriman, Special Assistant to the President, at a meeting held for employees of the Economic Cooperation Administration at the Statler Hotel in Washington. For the statement by the President upon signing the Foreign Assistance Act on April 3, 1948, see the 1948 volume, this series, Item 64.