Harry S. Truman
August 09, 1951

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House on the International Children's Emergency Fund.
Dear_____________:
I am writing to ask that the Congress authorize a contribution of twelve million dollars by the United States to the International Children's Emergency Fund. This sum would be authorized for the current fiscal year.
The General Assembly of the United Nations, on December 1, 1950, extended the operations of the Children's Fund for a period of three years. Since the authorization to make financial contributions to the Fund expired last June 30, we can now make no further contribution without this new authority from the Congress.
The United States has a long tradition of participation in, and financial support for, international children's welfare work. Nothing is more consistent with our basic interests or more representative of our humanitarian ideals.
The Children's Fund has done a most constructive job over the last four years. In Europe, it has helped more than fifteen million children. The main work of the Fund has now shifted from Europe to the underdeveloped areas of Asia and Latin America. Here the Fund will bring supplies and services to help meet urgent needs of children and to strengthen the permanent child welfare programs of the countries themselves.
I know that the Congress is aware of the many past accomplishments of the Children's Fund. I am confident that the people of this country want to continue to support the great work the Fund is doing. There is real need to carry on this work. Millions of children will be helped.
I have asked the Secretary of State to prepare draft legislation to carry out this recommendation. It is my hope that the Congress will find it possible to give early consideration to this measure.

Sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Albert W. Barkley, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable Sam Rayburn, Speaker of the House of Representatives.