Harry S. Truman
August 25, 1950

Statement by the President Upon Issuing Order Taking Control of the Nation's Railroads.
I HAVE today issued an Executive order, providing for taking over the country's railroads at 4 p.m., eastern standard time, on August 27, 1950, and providing for their operation by the Secretary of the Army in the name of the United States Government.
A nationwide strike has been called for 6 a.m., Monday, August 28, by two of the railroad labor organizations--the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen and the Order of Railway Conductors. These unions have declined to accept the findings and recommendations of an emergency board created by the President under the Railway Labor Act. In the strike situation thus confronting us, governmental seizure is imperative for the protection of our citizens.
It is essential to the national defense and the security of the Nation, to the public health, and to the public welfare generally that every possible step be taken by the Government to assure to the fullest possible extent continuous and uninterrupted transportation service. Accordingly, I intend to take all steps necessary to assure the continued operation of the railroads.
I call upon every railroad work to cooperate with the Government by remaining on duty. I call upon the officers of the railroad labor organizations to take appropriate action to keep their members at work.
The Executive order I have issued provides that, until further order of the President or the Secretary of the Army, the terms and conditions of employment now in effect on the railroads shall continue in effect, without prejudice to existing equities or to the effectiveness of such retroactive provisions as may be included in the final settlement of the disputes between the carriers and the workers.
Note: The President referred to Executive Order 10155 "Possession, Control, and Operation of Certain Railroads" (3 CFR, 1949-1953 Comp., p. 331).
The dispute ended on May 21, 1952, when the three operating unions, the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen, the Order of Railway Conductors, and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen, accepted the terms arranged by the Government. On May 23, 1952, the railroads were returned to their owners after having been operated by the U.S. Army for a period of 21 months.