Harry S. Truman
August 16, 1951

Proclamation 2938—Registration: Guam

Whereastitle I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act (62 Stat. 604), as amended, contains, in part, the following provisions:
"SEC. 3. Except as otherwise provided in this title, it shall be the duty of every male citizen of the United States, and every other male person now or hereafter in the United States, who, on the day or days fixed for the first or any subsequent registration, is between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six, to present himself for and submit to registration at such time or times and place or places, and in such manner, as shall be determined by proclamation of the President and by rules and regulations prescribed hereunder."
* * * * *
"SEC. 6. (a) Commissioned officers, warrant officers, pay clerks, enlisted men, and aviation cadets of the Regular Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the Coast and Geodetic Survey and the Public Health Service; cadets, United States Military Academy; midshipmen, United States Navy; cadets, United States Coast Guard Academy; midshipmen, Merchant Marine Reserve, United States Naval Reserves; students enrolled in an officer procurement program at military colleges the curriculum of which is approved by the Secretary of Defense; members of the reserve components of the Armed Forces, the Coast Guard, and the Public Health Service, while on active duty; and foreign diplomatic representatives, technical attaches of foreign embassies and legations, consuls general, consults, vice consults and other consular agents of foreign countries who are not citizens of the United States, and members of their families, and persons in other categories to be specified by the president who are not citizens of the United States, shall not be required to be registered under section 3 and shall be relieved from liability for training and service under section 4, except that aliens admitted for permanent residence in the United States shall not be so exempted."
"(k) No exception from registration, or exemption or deferment from training and service, under this title, shall continue after the cause therefor ceases to exist."
* * * * *
"SEC. 10. * * *
(b) The President is authorized -

(1) to prescribe the necessary rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this title;"
* * * * *
"(5) to utilize the services of any or all departments and any and all officers or agents of the United States, and to accept the services of all officers and agents of the several States, Territories, and possessions, and subdivisions thereof, and the district of Columbia, and of private welfare organizations, in the execution of this title;"
* * * * *
"SEC. 15. (a) Every person shall be deemed to have notice of the requirements of this title upon publication by the President of a proclamation or other public notice fixing a time for any registration under section 3."
* * * * *
Whereason the twentieth day of July, 1948, I issued a proclamation calling upon all male persons subject to registration in the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Territories of Alaska and Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands to present themselves for and submit to registration; and
Whereasby section 1(v) of the 1951 Amendments to the Universal Military Training and Service Act, approved June 19, 1951, the definition of the term "United States", when used in a geographical sense in title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, was extended to include Guam:
Now, Therefore, I, Harry S. Truman,President of the United States of America, under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, do proclaim the following:
1. The registration of male citizens of the United States, and other male persons, now or hereafter in Guam, who shall have attained the eighteenth anniversary of the day of their birth and who shall have not attained the twenty-sixth anniversary of the day of their birth shall take place in Guam between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. on the day or days hereinafter designated for their registration, as follows:
(a) Every citizen of the United States born on or after September 7, 1926, but not after September 6, 1933, shall be registered on Thursday, the 6th day of September, 1951.
(b) Every citizen of the United States born after September 6, 1933, shall be registered on the day he attains the eighteenth anniversary of the day of his birth, or within five days thereafter.
(c) Every person who is not a citizen of the United States shall be registered on the day or any of the days fixed in this paragraph for the registration of a citizen of the United States of his age or on any day within the period of six months following the day on which he entered any of the following: The continental United States, the Territory of Alaska, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Guam.
2. (a) Every male citizen of the United States and every other male person now or hereafter in Guam, other than persons excepted by ort pursuant to section 6(a) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and those previously registered pursuant to the said proclamation of July 20, 1948, who is within Guam and who shall have attained the eighteenth anniversary of the day of his birth and who shall have not attained the twenty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth on the day or any of the days fixed herein for his registration is required to and shall on that day or any of those days present himself for and submit to registration before a duly designated registration official or selective service local board having jurisdiction in the area in which he has his permanent home or in which he may happen to be on that day or any of those days.
(b) If a person subject to registration is in Guam on the day or any of the days fixed for his registration but because of circumstances beyond his control is unable to present himself for and submit to registration on that day or any of those days he shall do so as soon as possible after the cause for such inability ceases to exist. If a citizen of the United States subject to registration is not in Guam on the day or any of the days fixed for his registration but subsequently enters Guam he shall, within five days after such entrance, present himself for and submit to registration before a duly designated registration official or selective service local board. If a person subject to registration who is not a citizen of the United States is not in Guam on the day or any of the days fixed in paragraph numbered 1 hereof for the registration of a citizen of the United States of his age but subsequently enters Guam he shall present himself for and submit to registration before a duly designated registration official or selective service local board within the period of six months following the day on which he entered any of the following: The continental United States, the Territory of Alaska, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Guam.
3. Every person subject to registration is required to familiarize himself with the rules and regulations governing registration and to comply therewith.
4. The duty of any person to present himself for and submit to registration in accordance with any previous proclamation issued under said Act shall not be affected by this proclamation.
5. I call upon the Governor of Guam, all officers and agents of Guam, and all local boards which, and agents thereof who, are appointed under the provisions of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, or the regulations prescribed thereunder, to do and perform all acts and services necessary to accomplish effective and complete registration.
6. In order that there may be full cooperation in carrying into effect the purposes of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, I urge all employers and Government agencies of all kinds - Federal and local - to give those under their charge sufficient time in which to fulfill the obligations of registration incumbent upon them under the said Act and this proclamation.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
Doneat the City of Washington this 16th day of August in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and seventy-sixth.


HARRY S. TRUMAN
By the President:
JAMES E. WEBB,

Acting Secretary of State.