Harry S. Truman
August 24, 1950

Statement by the President Upon Nominating U.S. Representatives to the Fifth Session of the U.N. General Assembly.
I AM today nominating the following persons to be Representatives of the United States of America to the Fifth Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, to be held at New York, N.Y., beginning September 19, 1950: Warren R. Austin of Vermont, Mrs. Anna Eleanor Roosevelt of New York, John J. Sparkman, United States Senator from the State of Alabama, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., United States Senator from the State of Massachusetts, John Foster Dulles of New York.
The following are being nominated to be Alternate Representatives of the United States of America to the Fifth Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, to be held in New York, N.Y., beginning September 19, 1950: Benjamin V. Cohen of New York, John Sherman Cooper of Kentucky, Ernest A. Gross of New York, Edith S. Sampson of Illinois, John C. Ross of New York.
The Secretary of State will be head of the delegation, and in his absence Ambassador Austin as senior representative of the United States will serve as chairman of the delegation.
The nomination of Senator John J. Sparkman and Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., to serve as representatives represents a return to the practice of having members of Congress participate in the delegation to the General Assembly.
The selection of Senator Sparkman and Senator Lodge has been made after consultation with the leaders in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and upon the basis of including Senators who are not up for reelection this fall. It has been agreed with the leaders of the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate and of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House of Representatives that two members of the House of Representatives shall be nominated to serve on the delegation to the General Assembly next year. The participation in the delegation of a Republican and a Democratic Senator represents another step in the bipartisan foreign policy.