Harry S. Truman
August 17, 1950

Executive Order 10153—Regulations Relating to Certain Travel Time of Members of the Uniformed Services Called to Active Duty in Excess of Thirty Days
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 201(e) of the Career Compensation Act of 1949, approved October 12 1949 (Public Law 351, 81st Congress), and as President of the United States and Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, I hereby prescribe the following regulations relating to the inclusion as active duty of time required for travel from home to first duty station and from last duty station to home by members of the uniformed services called or ordered to active duty in excess of thirty days:
SECTION 1. In case travel by public transportation is authorized, the travel time included as active duty shall be based upon actual and necessary schedules which most nearly coincide with the possible time of departure and arrival by the mode of transportation actually used, or by public surface transportation if the travel is actually performed by private conveyance without having been specifically authorized.
SEC. 2. In case travel by private conveyance is specifically authorized and the travel is so performed, the travel time included as active duty shall be computed on the basis of one day for each three hundred miles traveled, and one day of travel time shall also be allowed for each fraction of three hundred miles in excess of one hundred and fifty miles. The distance traveled shall be computed on the basis of distances established by the official mileage tables in use by the uniformed services. Travel by private conveyance shall not be specifically authorized in any case in which the call to active duty is for a period of less than ninety consecutive days.
SEC. 3. The Secretaries concerned (within the meaning of section 102(f) of the said Career Compensation Act of 1949) may prescribe with respect to personnel of the uniformed services within their respective departments or agency such supplementary regulations not inconsistent herewith as they may deem necessary or desirable for carrying out these regulations, and such supplementary regulations shall be uniform for all the services to the fullest extent practicable.
SEC. 4. This order shall become effective on September 1, 1950.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

August 17, 1950