Harry S. Truman
August 29, 1949

Remarks in Philadelphia at the American Legion Convention Luncheon.
Mr. Chairman, Governor Duff, distinguished guests and fallow Legionnaires, and those who have been so kind as to help make this 31st Legion Convention a success:
I appreciate most highly the courtesies which have been extended to me. I appreciate very much the privilege of riding behind that famous Horse Guard, which I understand has escorted every President that has come to Philadelphia since George Washington. It is a wonderful turnout, and it makes a horse artilleryman homesick to see horses once more in use.
I am scheduled, as you know, to discuss some national interests at the American Legion Convention about 3 o'clock, and I am sorry that I can't make you a keynote speech here now. It wouldn't be fair to the Legionnaires who are responsible for my presence here today, although I am a delegate, you understand, from Missouri. I have been a delegate from Missouri for 31 years, and I hope I will have the privilege of being a delegate for 31 more years. I hope all of you will tune in and listen to the keynote speech.
You know, I was particularly interested to meet the president of the Union League Club. The first time I ever had luncheon in Philadelphia I was the guest of the Grand Lodge of Philadelphia of Masons, and he took me to the Union League Club for lunch; and I had a grand luncheon and enjoyed it immensely. And I want to say that the windows of the League Club were filled as I went by today, and they applauded. I appreciated that more than anything.
I hope all of you will turn on your radios and listen to what I have to say. It is not a Legionnaire speech, it is a speech on international affairs which affects the welfare of the Nation in days to come, and one in which you will be particularly interested. I didn't intend to give myself a plug when I got up here.
I had been hopeful that I would be able to compliment the young singer who was going to appear up there on the balcony, and would have entertained you much better than I have. I want to thank that orchestra for playing all my favorites. I was listening every time they played. I still like music. Some people think the country would have been much better off if I had gone ahead and been a professional musician.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 2:10 p.m. at the Bellevue-Stratford Hotel in Philadelphia. His opening words referred to Albert Greenfield, chairman of the Citizens Reception Committee, and James H. Duff, Governor of Pennsylvania. He later referred to Henry B. Bryans, president of the Union League Club, and to the singer, Mario Lanza.