Harry S. Truman
December 01, 1947

Special Message to the Congress on Extending the Maritime Commission's Authority To Operate, Sell, and Charter Vessels.
To the Congress of the United States:
The present authority of the United States Maritime Commission to operate, sell, and charter Government-owned vessels which were built during the war will expire on February 29, 1948.
It is now clearly apparent that this authority must be continued beyond that date in order to prevent a breakdown in vital shipping services.
Over 1200 dry-cargo vessels are now chartered to American citizens by the Commission. The bulk of this fleet is devoted to carrying vital relief cargo, chiefly coal and grain exports. Its continued operation will be essential in furnishing aid to foreign countries during this winter. Other portions of this chartered fleet are devoted to essential coastwise and intercoastal services.
Under its authority to operate vessels, the Maritime Commission, through general agents, is now operating emergency passenger vessels and tankers. It is necessary to continue the authority for the operation of these passenger vessels if we are to meet essential needs for which no other passenger service is available. While the number of tankers operated by the Commission is being steadily reduced as tankers are sold under the Ship Sales Act, those which remain unsold must be kept in operation to assist in averting a serious world-wide shortage of petroleum.
In order to avoid needless disruption of the vital services now being provided with Government-owned ships, the present authority of the Maritime Commission should be renewed wall in advance of its expiration date. I recommend, therefore, that the Congress give consideration to this matter during its present session.
There are other questions concerning the maritime industry which will require consideration of new legislation in the near future. These questions relate to the shipping requirements of the European Recovery Program and the long-range requirements of our own merchant marine. Our most immediate need, however, is to assure the maintenance of essential shipping services by continuing in effect the present provisions of law which make possible the use of Government-owned ships.
Accordingly, I recommend that these provisions of law be extended until June 30, 1949.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: On February 27, 1948, the President approved a joint resolution providing for continuation of the authority of the Maritime Commission until March 1, 1949 (62 Stat. 38).