Harry S. Truman
December 26, 1947

Executive Order 9914—Providing for the Administration of the Foreign Aid Act of 1947
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes of the United States particularly the Foreign Air Act of 1947, and as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered, in the interest of the internal management of the Government, as follows:
1. The Secretary of State is hereby authorized and directed:
(a) To perform the functions and exercise the powers and authority vested in the President by the Foreign Aid Act of 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), exclusive of section 11(b) and 11(d) thereof: Provided that-
(1) In designating, under section 3 of the Act, the existing departments, agencies, or independent establishments of the Government through which certain functions, powers, and authority under the Act shall be performed or exercised, the Secretary shall act with the concurrence of the department, agency, or establishment concerned in each case.
(2) In promulgating, under section 4 of the Act, any regulations controlling the purchase or procurement of commodities, and in promulgating, under section 10 of the Act, any rules and regulations necessary and proper to carry out any of the provisions of the Act, the Secretary shall, to the extent that any such rule or regulation affects the operations of any agency, establishment, or department other than the Department of State, act with the concurrence of the agency, establishment or department concerned in each case.
(3) In making the determinations, required under paragraphs 2 and 3 of section 4 of the Act, whether commodities to be purchased or procured under the Act are in short supply in the United States, the Secretary of State shall act on the advice of the heads of the appropriate departments, agencies or establishments.
(4) In making the determinations required under subsection (e) of section 11 of the Act, whether a commodity required by any agency of the Government under any price support program is in excess of domestic requirements, the Secretary of State shall act on the advice of the Secretary of Agriculture; and such determinations shall be restricted to those necessary in connection with aid to the recipient countries, as defined in the Act.
(b) To take such other action, not inconsistent with the Act and this order as may be necessary to provide aid in accordance with the provisions of the Act, including the making of provisions for such personnel, supplies, facilities, and services as shall be necessary to carry out the provisions of this order, and the making of such arrangement with other departments, agencies and independent establishments of the Government and with other countries and international organizations as may be necessary and proper for carrying out the provisions and accomplishing the purposes of the Act.
2. The field administrator referred to in section 10 of the Act, in exercising his responsibility for administering in the recipient countries the program of assistance provided for in the Act, shall act under the guidance and in accordance with the instructions of the Secretary of State.
3. All funds appropriated to carry out the provisions of the Act by the Third Supplemental Appropriation Act, 1948 (such funds being in the amount of $522,000,000), are hereby transferred to the Department of State, to be administered in accordance with the provisions of the Act (as implemented by this order) and of the said Appropriation Act.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

December 26, 1947