Harry S. Truman
December 19, 1945

Special Message to the Senate Transmitting Nominations of United States Representatives to the United Nations.
To the Senate of the United States:
In conformity with the provisions of S. 1580, I am sending to the Senate herewith for its advice and consent nominations of the American representatives and alternate representatives for the first part of the first meeting of the General Assembly of the United Nations which is to convene in London early in January. I am also sending to the Senate herewith the nomination of the American representative to the Security Council which will also meet in London sometime in January as soon as that body has been established through the election of its nonpermanent members by the General Assembly.
Section 2(d) of the pending bill wisely provides that the President, or the Secretary of State at the direction of the President, may represent the United States at any meeting of the United Nations regardless of those provisions which call for the appointment of representatives by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. At my request the Secretary of State will, for at least a portion of the session, attend the initial session of the General Assembly. For that reason I am sending to the Senate the nominations of only four representatives to the General Assembly. The Secretary of State will, during the period he is present, act as the senior representative of the United States to the General Assembly. The nominations of the Alternates will insure that there will at all times be five representatives of the United States qualified under the provisions of S. 1580.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The President transmitted with the message the following nominations:
U.S. Representative to the United Nations with the rank and status of Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, and U.S. Representative to the Security Council: Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.
U.S. Representatives to the first part of the First Session of the U.N. General Assembly to be held in London, January 1946: Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.; Tom Connally, U.S. Senator from Texas; Arthur H. Vandenberg, U.S. Senator from Michigan; and Mrs. Anna Eleanor Roosevelt.
Alternate U.S. Representatives to the first part of the First Session of the U.N. General Assembly: Sol Bloom, U.S. Representative from New York; Charles A. Eaton, U.S. Representative from New Jersey; Frank C. Walker; John Foster Dulles; and John G. Townsend, Jr.