Harry S. Truman
December 22, 1950

Remarks in Kansas City at a Dinner of the Knights of the Red Cross of Constantine.
Sovereign Land, His Excellency the Governor of Missouri, His Excellency the Governor of Kansas, distinguished guests:
It certainly is a very great pleasure and a privilege to be here with you tonight. There is nothing like coming home. There is nothing like meeting your personal friends. There is nothing like feeling that they are actually glad to see you.
I can't tell you how much I appreciated the lovely singing of this beautiful young lady down here. And that orchestra played my kind of music. It was good, and I liked it.
And this wonderful choir, I am very certain that you would much rather be listening to that choir than listening to me.
I appreciated these welcome home addresses, and I want to say to you that it is my opinion that the country is not confused. The country has been amply advised as to what is going on. I think it is the confusers, Roy, that are confused, not the country or the people. I am certainly sure of that.
The American people understand the situation. The American people are willing to make all the sacrifices that are necessary to meet the situation with which we are faced--the situation which has been accumulating since January 1st, 1946, on a gradual basis.
We are in excellent shape to meet that situation. All we need now is time, and that is what we are fighting for. We have never been in a crisis that we did not meet it.
I hope you will spend some time reading of certain crises which we have faced. Washington had a terrific one in 1796. He met it. Old Jackson had one that was one of the best, and he met it. In the 1860's we had another crisis, and Abraham Lincoln met it. Woodrow Wilson faced the same situation.
I wish you would read just what happened in those days, and just what was said by people who were supposed to inform the people. You will find that the situation has not changed a bit. There isn't a particle of difference in the approach.
And we will meet this situation just as those were met. And when we get through we will have a peaceful world, and a world that is safe for you and myself, and everybody else, to live in. I know that is coming.
I am going to address you on Sunday afternoon, on Christmas and what I think it means, particularly this one. I hope you will listen, and I hope you will do what I am asking you to do.
I am sorry I have to leave, but in 1911-- a month or so ago, in October, I think--this Lodge to which I belong was instituted under a charter, and I was elected the first presiding officer. Since that time, except when I have been out of reach, at the end of each year I have officiated as the installing officer. This is the only night on which I could officiate.
You know, when I come home, people are so good to me that they make the entertainments so great and with such small space between them it is almost like my day after day in Washington. But I like it, because it's home.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 8:30 p.m. at the Muehlebach Hotel in Kansas City, Mo. In his opening words he referred to Frank S. Land, a Sovereign in the Order of the Red Cross of Constantine, Forrest Smith, Governor of Missouri, and Frank Carlson, Governor of Kansas. Later he referred to Roy A. Roberts, president and general manager of the Kansas City Star.