Harry S. Truman
February 05, 1952

Remarks at the Veterans of foreign Wars Dinner.
Mr. Commander, distinguished guests:
It has been a long time since I have had the privilege of attending this dinner. When I was a Member of the United States Senate, I was able to come regularly. I am glad of the privilege to come once more, and I am sorry that I couldn't be with you all evening. But there are so many calls and things on the President, and the first Lady--she is attending a benefit for some organization here that needs a benefit--I had to help her get off to that program.
This organization is quite an organization. If I am not mistaken, if there are no old Confederates or GARs alive, this is the oldest veterans organization in existence now, isn't that correct? I became a member of it as soon as I was eligible. That was back in 1919, as soon as I got back from overseas, and I am still a dues-paying member.
I enjoyed the associations when you had the convention in Kansas City, during the 1920's I think it was, and I was the presiding judge of the county court of Jackson County--which is not a court, it is an administrative organization. The only judicial thing that that court does is to get two physicians to tell the court that a fellow is mentally unbalanced, then they declare him insane. In a great many instances, the customers on the other side of the bench think that the court ought to go to the insane asylum instead of themselves; and a lot of people in the county thought that, too. But I was lucky in having a lot of good health.
As I remember it--and of course now, I am bragging--I think that Kansas City convention was one of the finest ones you ever had. I also had some experience previous to that, in 1921, with a Legion convention, which practically tore up the town. I'll say this for the V.F.W.., they left the town in good shape, they didn't tear down any pillars, they didn't tear down any lampposts nor tear up the streets very much. We had a grand time.
I think this is a great idea that you have, of having this dinner for those members of the Government who have been members of the Armed forces. It is a grand thing. It takes notice of the fact that there are lots of ways for a man to display his patriotism. He can do it by making his contribution to the production effort of the country. He can do it as a part of the legislative and administrative branches of the Government, and he can do it also by wearing a uniform. And when he does all three, he has really made a contribution to the welfare of the country.
We are faced at the present time with a very peculiar situation. It is an emergency which is hard for people to understand, because in a lot of instances it does not really touch them except when they have to pay taxes to support the situation--and then they scream like they always do when you have anything to do with taxes.
But we are going through a period the conclusion of which if we can bring it out successfully, will mean peace in the world from now on. If we are not successful, it may mean the destruction of civilization. Most of you understand that situation. Most of you appreciate what we are going through.
We are faced with a situation now which we face every 4 years, in which the country has to go through a certain amount of spasms to decide on what it is going to do, and not going to do--and throw bricks and mud and all sorts of things at each other.
But, in the final analysis, when the welfare of the country is at stake, everybody does his part. We have never yet been in a condition when the country as a whole does not come to the support of the Government when the very existence of the country is at stake. And I know that will happen this time, in spite of the fact that we are just going to have a lot of fun this summer.
It started last night in a kind of riot over here at Georgetown University. I listened to that riot because I was trying to find out what was going on. You know, I couldn't hear a word--I couldn't hear a word. It must have been a most enthusiastic meeting.
I am glad of that, because that means there is going to be quite an interest in this coming campaign this year. Maybe we will come out with the right result. When the time comes, I am going to try to tell you what the right result is. That is not an announcement.
I understand that you are going to present a medal to that great ship captain who believes in the ancient tradition. I think he is entitled to it. I think he earned it. And I want to congratulate this organization, and to congratulate that good captain for carrying out a tradition that is as old as shipping in the world is.
I hope this organization will continue to be the energetic, patriotic organization that it always has been. And I am sure it will.
And I hope the time will come when you will expire from old age, because there won't be any foreign wars.
Note: The President spoke at 9:25 p.m. at the Statler Hotel in Washington. His opening words "Mr. Commander" referred to Frank C. Hilton, national commander of the Veterans of foreign Wars.
The dinner was an annual affair held to honor Members of Congress with military service records and was the occasion for the annual presentation of the Gen. Omar N. Bradley Gold Medal and the Veterans of foreign Wars Gold Citizenship Medal. The General Bradley medal was presented in absentia to Maj. Gen. William f. Dean, former commanding general of the 24th Infantry Division, who had been a prisoner of war in North Korea since the summer of 1950. The V.F.W.. medal and a certificate of merit were presented to Capt. Henrik Kurt Carlsen for his courageous actions aboard the listing Isbrandtsen Line freighter Flying Enterprise before the ship sank in the English Channel on January 10, 1952. President Truman pinned the medal on Captain Carlsen's lapel and shook his hand.