Harry S. Truman
February 27, 1948

Executive Order 9933—Amending Executive Order No. 9805 Prescribing Regulations Governing Payment of Travel and Transportation Expenses of Civilian Officers and Employees of the United States When Transferred From One Official Station to Another for Permanent Duty
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by the act of August 2, 1946, 60 Stat. 806. and in the interest of the internal management of the Government, it is ordered that section 12 of Executive Order No. 9805 of November 25, 1946, prescribing regulations governing payment of travel and transportation expenses of civilian officers and employees of the United States when transferred from one official station to another for permanent duty be, and it is hereby, amended to read as follows:
Sec. 12 (a) Commutation of expenses—general. In lieu of the payment of actual expenses of transportation, packing, crating, drayage, and unpacking of household goods and personal effects in the case of transfers between points within the continental United States, reimbursement shall be made to the employee on a commuted basis at rates per hundred pounds as fixed by zones In Schedule A which is attached to and made a part of these regulations. The amount payable shall be the product of the applicable rate and the net weight of household goods and personal effects actually shipped by carrier for the employee (within the weight limitation prescribed by section 16 hereof). Government bills of lading shall not be used.
(b) Commutation of expenses—temporary storage. In lieu of the payment of actual expenses of temporary storage of household goods and personal effects in the case of transfers between points within the continental United States and in addition to allowances under Schedule A, reimbursement shall be made to the employee at the commuted rate of $1.60 per hundred pounds for the first 30 days of storage or fraction thereof plus 40¢ per hundred pounds for the next 30 days or fraction thereof: Provided, however, that the amount of the reimbursement shall not exceed the amount actually paid by the employee for the storage in question. Any claim for reimbursement for temporary storage shall be supported by the original or certified copy of the receipted warehouse bill.
This order shall become effective as of July 1, 1947, and shall be published in the Federal Register.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
THE WHITE HOUSE,
February 27, 1948.