Harry S. Truman
February 20, 1948

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report on U.S. Participation in the United Nations.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith to the Congress, pursuant to the United Nations Participation Act of 1945 (section 4, Public Law 264, 79th Congress, 59 Stat. 620), my second annual report on the activities of the United Nations and the participation of the United States therein covering the calendar year 1947.
The problems of international relations arising this past year in the meetings of the United Nations were met neither by evasion nor by meaningless compromises. The decisions and recommendations on the large number of problems noted in this Report are straightforward expressions of the judgment held by the overwhelming majority of the Members on the right and effective course to follow. The small minority holding opposing views on certain important problems, however, have presented to the organization a new question of disturbing character through their nonparticipation in carrying out the recommendations with which these Members have disagreed.
By its recommendations, the United Nations is acting to maintain the independence and integrity of Greece, to bring independence to Korea, and to place the question of Palestine on the way to settlement on the basis of two independent states, one Arab and one Jewish. The General Assembly has been equipped to bring its full weight to bear on the maintenance of good relations between states during this next year, through the new Interim Committee. As decided upon by the General Assembly, remedies will be sought, through consultation among the great powers and by study among all Members, to improve the functioning of the voting provisions of the Charter and hence to strengthen the organization by increasing the effectiveness of the Security Council.
Every principal organ of the United Nations is at work, and most of the necessary committees, commissions, and subcommittees have been established. In its handling of fundamental international problems during the past year, the United Nations has felt the profound changes in world relationships and the difficulties which we still face in all aspects of international relations. Naturally, therefore, its work is not free from disappointments. This is especially true in regard to the establishment of international control of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, and to various political, economic and other problems that directly or indirectly affect progress toward attaining international security. But, whatever the disappointments, the United Nations is making headway.
The United States will continue as heretofore to carry its full share of responsibility and of leadership in the United Nations. We hope this will encourage every Member, in the same spirit, to help the United Nations to achieve the purposes that gave it birth and to give its principles realistic effect in the problems that come before it. Our faith in the United Nations is ever-constant. We shall seek to demonstrate that faith both by energetic support and by the spirit of our participation.
The accompanying Report describes the efforts made by this Government to contribute to constructive achievement in the United Nations during the past year through the policies stated by United States representatives and through important proposals initiated in the various organs. These efforts were directed above all to assuring that the principles of the United Nations would be given full effect. The aim of our policy in matters not falling within the United Nations, but rather within direct United States relations with other governments, was to uphold the same basic principles. These principles are fundamentally those to which we have traditionally given allegiance.
It continues to be the intention of the United States to foster throughout our relations with other nations the fulfilment of the Charter in its entirety. We realize that nothing less than fidelity to the principles and faithful effort to achieve the purposes of the Charter will meet the genuine needs of any nation, whether large or small. Accordingly, the strengthening of the United Nations continues to be a cornerstone of the foreign policy of the United States.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The report is printed in House Document 548 (80th Cong. 2d sess.).