Harry S. Truman
February 13, 1947

Statement by the President Urging Extension of Authority To Ship Emergency Supplies to Europe.
THIS GOVERNMENT stands ready to do everything within its power to relieve the plight of the British people in their present fuel emergency.
Although we have received no request from England for aid, I have directed Captain Granville Conway, Coordinator of Emergency Export Programs, to determine how quickly and in what quantity coal can be landed at British ports. It would take a minimum of 15 days to ship coal from this country to England. Such shipments might very well arrive too late to help England in the present emergency.
There are, however, a number of colliers at sea in the vicinity of the British Isles carrying coal to other European countries. It may be possible to divert some of these colliers to English ports.
In view of the present emergency in England, the United States representative on the European Coal Organization which sits in London has been instructed to support a request for a reallocation of the shipments of coal now at sea, if this is the British desire. It is understood, of course, that coal diverted from other countries would be made up as rapidly as shipping schedules can be readjusted.
A remarkable job has been done in stepping up our export shipments of coal. In December, 1.8 million tons were shipped; in January, 2.5 million tons; and this month we plan to ship 2.9 million tons. In March, we hope to do even better, for these shipments are vital to the rehabilitation of Europe and other war-torn areas.
To meet these future schedules it is imperative that uncertainty over continuation of the authority of the Maritime Commission to operate Government-owned ships be dispelled as quickly as possible. This authority, unless extended by the Congress, will expire on March 1.
On January 21, I asked the Congress to adopt a joint resolution extending the authority to June 30. I am gratified that the House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries is holding hearings on this resolution today.
I cannot emphasize too strongly the need for quick action by the House and the Senate on this legislation because without it our emergency export programs for fuel and grain will break down completely at the end of this month. Every day that action is delayed means further disruption of February schedules for shipments of coal and wheat to Europe. Because of the uncertainty now prevailing tanker shipments of fuel oil to the East Coast ports have already slowed down.
I urge the Congress to act promptly to extend the authority of the Maritime Commission to operate the ships which are so vitally needed.
Note: On February 26 the President approved a joint resolution (61 Stat. 6), providing for the continuation of the authority of the Maritime Commission to operate vessels until JULY 1, 1947.
On February 14 the White House released a message from Prime Minister Clement Attlee expressing appreciation for the offer of help in the coal shortage but declining to ask that cargoes be diverted to English ports in view of the need for coal in Europe.