Harry S. Truman
February 14, 1952

Special Message to the Congress Requesting That the Special Assistant to the Attorney General Be Given the Power of Subpoena.
To the Congress of the United States:
I recommend that the Congress enact temporary legislation to give Mr. Newbold Morris, Special Assistant to the Attorney General, the power to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence, and the authority to administer oaths. Such legislation is necessary to enable Mr. Morris to make a thorough and effective investigation of illegal or improper conduct in the transaction of Government business.
Mr. Morris has been appointed Special assistant to the Attorney General to investigate illegal or unethical conduct by Federal officers and employees, and other persons, relating to the performance of official Government business. Mr. Morris will also make recommendations as to actions that should be taken to punish any wrongdoers, to protect the Federal Government in the future against illegal and improper acts, and to insure the highest standards of honesty and integrity in the conduct of official Government business.
The facilities of the Executive branch of the Government are being made available to assist Mr. Morris in performing his functions and responsibilities. He is authorized to obtain from the Executive branch such information and assistance, including papers, records and documents, as he needs to carry out his task. Officers or employees of the Executive branch assigned to Mr. Morris' staff will work under his direction and control for the period of their assignment.
This authority from the Executive branch, however, is not enough. Much of the necessary evidence will have to come from the records and testimony of persons who are not connected with the Federal Government. To do his job thoroughly, therefore, Mr. Morris must be able to obtain testimony and evidence from persons and organizations outside the Government. Without such testimony and evidence, Mr. Morris will be unable to make a fully effective and conclusive investigation. It is therefore essential that he be given the power of subpoena, the power to compel testimony by granting immunity in appropriate cases and the power to administer oaths.
Attached is a draft of a joint resolution to accomplish this purpose. I earnestly recommend its speedy enactment by the Congress.
The powers the proposed joint resolution would confer are to be exercised by Mr. Morris, as the Special Assistant to the Attorney General designated for this important task, and a limited number of his personal assistants. In no event, would the authority extend beyond December 31, 1952.
In short, the legislation requested is for a limited, specific purpose, but a very necessary one.
I know that every citizen wants Mr. Morris to clean up any wrong-doing there may be in the Government, and to recommend measures to safeguard against any future misconduct. He has my complete support in his important task. I urgently request the Congress to give him its support by enacting this necessary legislation.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: See also Items 35 [1], 44 [10], 64 [15].