Harry S. Truman
January 29, 1952

Remarks Upon Presenting Medals of Honor to M. Sgt. Hubert L. Lee and Sgt. Joseph C. Rodriguez, USA.
I WANT to call your attention to those two citations--among the most remarkable I have ever read, and I have furnished more of these medals to these brave young men than any other President, due to the fact that the other Presidents didn't have the same situation to face that these young men and the Government of the United States have had to face.
Wouldn't it be a wonderful thing if in our civil affairs we had fighters for the right like these two young men.
I hope that their example will be enough to cause more people to take the responsibility for government that they should take, and to fight for the right as these two young men fought for liberty and the welfare of the world.
Note: The presentation was made by the President in a ceremony in the Indian Treaty Room (Room 474) in the Executive Office Building at 12 noon. The citations follow:
The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress approved March 3, 1863, has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
MASTER SERGEANT HUBERT L. LEE, UNITED STATES ARMY
Sergeant Lee, Infantry, United States Army, a member of Company I, 23d Infantry Regiment, distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty in action against the enemy near Ip-o-ri, Korea, on 1 February 1951. When his platoon was forced from its position by a numerically superior enemy force, and his platoon leader wounded, Sergeant Lee assumed command, regrouped the remnants of his unit, and led them in repeated assaults to regain the position. Within twenty-five yards of his objective he received a leg wound from grenade fragments, but refused assistance and continued the attack. Although forced to withdraw five times, each time he regrouped his remaining men and renewed the assault. Moving forward at the head of his small group in the fifth attempt, he was struck by an exploding grenade, knocked to the ground and seriously wounded in both legs. Still refusing assistance, he advanced by crawling, rising to his knees to fire, and urging his men to follow. While thus directing the final assault he was wounded a third time, by small arms fire. Persistently continuing to crawl forward he directed his men in a final and successful attack which regained the vital objective. His intrepid leadership and determination led to the destruction of eighty-three of the enemy and withdrawal of the remainder, and was a vital factor in stopping the enemy attack. Sergeant Lee's indomitable courage, consummate valor and outstanding leadership reflect the highest credit upon himself, and are in keeping with the finest traditions of the Infantry and the United States Army.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress approved March 3, 1863 has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
SERGEANT JOSEPH C. RODRIGUEZ, UNITED STATES ARMY
Sergeant Rodriguez (then Private first Class), Infantry, United States Army, Company F, 17th Infantry Regiment, distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty in action against an armed enemy of the United Nations near Munye-ri, Korea, on 21 May 1951. Sergeant Rodriguez, an assistant squad leader of the 2d Platoon, was participating in an attack against a fanatical hostile force occupying well-fortified positions on rugged commanding terrain, when his squad's advance was halted within approximately sixty yards by a withering barrage of automatic weapons and small arms fire from five emplacements directly to the front and right and left flanks, together with grenades which the enemy rolled down the hill toward the advancing troops. Fully aware of the odds against him, Sergeant Rodriguez leaped to his feet, dashed sixty yards up the fire-swept slope, and after lobbing grenades into the first foxhole with deadly accuracy, ran around the left flank, silenced an automatic weapon with two grenades and continued his whirlwind assault to the top of the peak, wiping out two more foxholes and then, reaching the right flank, he tossed grenades into the remaining emplacement, destroying the gun and annihilating its crew. Sergeant Rodriguez' intrepid actions exacted a toll of fifteen enemy dead and, as a result of his incredible display of valor, the defense of the opposition was broken, the enemy routed, and the strategic strong point secured. His unflinching courage under fire and inspirational devotion to duty reflect highest credit on himself and uphold the honored traditions of the military service.
HARRY S. TRUMAN