Harry S. Truman
January 03, 1952

Statement by the President Upon Signing Executive Order Establishing the Missouri Basin Survey Commission.
I HAVE today signed an Executive order creating a Missouri Basin Survey Commission.
It will be the duty of this Commission to study the land and water resources of the Missouri River basin, and to make recommendations for the better protection, development, and use of those resources.
The 1951 floods have emphasized to me and to many other citizens the need for an up-to-date survey of the situation in the basin and of the present plans for the development of its land and water resources. There has not been a thorough reconsideration of the plans for flood control, irrigation, navigation, and hydroelectric power development in the Missouri basin since the Congress authorized the so-called "Pick-Sloan plan" in 1944. More recently, a basin-wide program for the development and conservation of land resources was prepared by the Department of Agriculture and submitted to the Congress.
There is general agreement that these previous plans contain much that is valuable and sound today. There is also general agreement that there is need now for a thorough reevaluation of the whole problem, in order that all who are concerned with the basin--Federal, State, and local governments and private groups and individuals--may have the benefit of an expert and authoritative judgment on what are the most important steps that should be taken in the future, and which of them should be taken first.
That is why I have established this Commission. I want them to review the many different kinds of problems that exist in the large area of the basin--ranging from the high, arid plains and mountains on the west to the humid, level lands along the lower river. I want them to give the country their advice as to the best way to proceed to achieve an orderly, businesslike development of the resources of the basin--a development that places first things first and provides for the greatest resulting benefits for all the people of the basin and the Nation.
The Commission will be composed of 11 members. I expect to ask both private citizens and Members of Congress to serve on it. I am asking the Commission to make its final report within a year.
I am giving the Commission authority to study the entire Missouri River basin, covering all or parts of the States of Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Minnesota, Colorado, Nebraska, Kansas, and Missouri, together with such closely related areas as may be desirable.
In carrying out its functions, I am instructing the Commission to take the following actions:
1. Review existing and proposed plans for the development, protection, and use of land and water resources in the basin.
2. Conduct on-the-site surveys and appraisals and hold public hearings.
3. Consider the estimated costs and benefits of projects and programs, and the economic soundness of development proposals.
4. Consult with State representatives and other groups within the basin.
5. Consider the proper division of financial responsibility between the Federal Government and the States for resource development.
I wish to make it plain that this new Commission is only for the purpose of surveying the situation and making recommendations for improvement. This Commission will not replace the existing Federal or State agencies concerned with carrying on development work in the basin. I am convinced--as 1 think most of the people in the basin convinced--that we need to improve our present organizational arrangements. I this Commission will give us its advice this field. But the Commission will not itself operate or construct any development projects.
Furthermore, we should go ahead, while this Commission is studying the problem, with much important work that is now underway in the basin. Federal expenditures for resource development work are necessarily being very sharply limited, during the present emergency period. Certain work must go forward, however, even in times like these, in order to strengthen our economic capacity or to prevent serious economic loss. The budget which I shall shortly transmit to the Congress contains minimum funds for this type of work, including the commencement of a limited number of projects which should not be longer delayed. I expect the recommendations of the Commission to be most valuable in advising us as to how we can achieve the necessary further development of the basin at the least cost.
The Survey Commission I am establishing by this order is similar to that which would be established under a joint resolution introduced in Congress last year by Senator Hennings and Congressman Magee of Missouri. In the Senate the resolution was cosponsored by Senators Chavez, Clements, Douglas, Green, Hill, Lehman, Murray, Flanders, Langer, Smith (Maine), Kefauver, Humphrey, Gillette, and Kerr. The establishment of such a survey group was also recommended by the joint Senate-House conference committee on the Army civil functions appropriation bill for the fiscal year 1952.
I share with the Members of Congress who have endorsed this approach, the hope that through such a Commission as this we can obtain wise and practical advice as to the best way of proceeding with the vitally important work of developing the land and water resources of the Missouri basin for the benefit of ourselves and our children.
Note: The President referred to Executive Order 10318 "Establishing the Missouri Basin Survey Commission" (3 CFR, 1949-1953 Comp., p. 846).
On February 25, 1952, the President signed Executive Order 10329 "Amending Executive Order No. 10318 of January 3, 1952, Relating to the Missouri Basin Survey Commission" (3 CFR, 1949-1953 Comp., p. 855).
The final report of the Commission, entitled "Missouri: Land and Water," was presented to the President on January 12, 1953 (Government Printing Office, 1953,295 pp.).
See also Item 32.