Harry S. Truman
July 26, 1951

Letter to the Chairman, Wage Stabilization Board, Requesting Investigation of a Labor Dispute Affecting the Production of Copper.
Dear Dr. Taylor:
On the basis of the information and advice submitted to me by the Office of Defense Mobilization and the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, I am of the opinion that the dispute between the American Smelting and Refining Company and the United Steelworkers of America at Garfield, Utah, is of a character which substantially threatens the progress of national defense. Thus, in accordance with the terms of E.O. 10233, I am referring the dispute to the Wage Stabilization Board and asking that the Board investigate and inquire into the issues in dispute and promptly report to me with its recommendations to the parties as to fair and equitable terms of settlement.
The Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization has reported to me on the serious effect of the strike on the production of copper and sulphuric acid, both of which are extremely critical to the defense program.
It is clear from the report of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service that negotiations to date have been fruitless and that, although full use has been made of mediation and conciliation facilities, the strike persists and is likely to persist. I am asking the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to provide the Board with a record of the issues in dispute.
As you know, this is the first occasion on which I have referred a dispute to the Board. It is my earnest hope that the men involved will comply with your request that they return to work while the matter is before the Board and that the utilization of the Board's machinery will thus serve its purpose of restoring to production the facilities necessary to the national defense. I am sure that, in that event, the Board will proceed promptly in its task of recommending to the parties fair and equitable terms of settlement of the dispute.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[Honorable George Taylor, Chairman, Wage Stabilization Board, Washington 25, D.C.]
Note: For the President's letter to the Chairman on the settlement of the dispute, see Item 277. See also Item 204.