Harry S. Truman
July 27, 1951

Statement by the President on the Mass Deportations in Hungary.
MANY Americans have expressed concern about the mass deportations from Hungary which are being carried out by the Communist government of that country. Their condemnation of these brutal acts against the people of Hungary is in the best American tradition of concern for liberty and justice. I am deeply moved by the tragic plight of the Hungarian people, who bear a heavy burden of oppression, and I share the abhorrence which has been expressed with regard to these measures which the Hungarian Government has instituted in wanton disregard of every principle of right and decency. The Government of the United States is giving the closest attention to the deportations in Hungary with a view to taking such steps as may appropriately expose this situation to public view and judgment and render the Hungarian Government accountable before the world for its infamous conduct.
The forced removal of thousands of persons from their homes by the Hungarian Government under the conditions which have been reported must be regarded as a flagrant violation of the human rights provisions of the Treaty of Peace. The United States Government has already formally charged the Government of Hungary with willfully and systematically contravening these provisions, which obligate that Government to secure to all persons under its jurisdiction the enjoyment of human rights and freedoms, and has exposed these violations before the United Nations.
In accordance with the terms of a resolution passed by the General Assembly on November 3, 1950, this Government will submit to the Secretary General of the United Nations, and through him to all member governments of the United Nations, detailed evidence which the Department of State has in its possession regarding many such violations. In view of the significant bearing which the present deportations have on the general question of the Hungarian Government's suppression of human rights and freedoms, the United States Government will also submit to the Secretary General all evidence which may be available from reliable sources regarding the conditions under which such expulsions are being conducted.