Harry S. Truman
July 01, 1952

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House Transmitting Report of the President's Materials Policy Commission.
My dear Mr._________:
I am transmitting to the Congress the report of the President's Materials Policy Commission, "Resources for freedom." Our knowledge and understanding of the materials position of the United States and of its allies throughout the free world will be considerably increased by the detailed review which has been prepared by the Commission. This is a document which deserves the most careful study by every member of the Congress, and I hope each one of them will take the time to familiarize himself with its contents.
This report, the fruit of months of intensive study by an independent citizen's group aided by experts drawn from Government, industry, and universities, shows that in the past decade the United States has changed from a net exporter to a net importer of materials, and projects an increasing dependence on imports for the future. The report indicates that our altered materials situation does not call for alarm but does call for adjustments in public policy and private activity.
In more than seventy specific recommendations, the Commission points out the actions which, in its judgment, will best assure the mounting supplies of materials and energy which our economic progress and security will require in the next quarter century.
I am requesting the various Government agencies to make a detailed study of these recommendations, and I am directing the National Security Resources Board to assume the responsibility of coordinating the findings and of maintaining a continuing review of materials policies and programs as a guide to public policy and private endeavor. As the need arises for legislation to solve materials problems affecting this Nation and other free nations, appropriate recommendations will be made to the Congress.
It is my hope that this report and the actions which may be taken as a result of it will contribute significantly to the improvement of this Nation's materials position and to the strengthening of the free world's economic security, both of which are the continuing objectives of United States policy.

Sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Alben W. Barkley, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable Sam Rayburn, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
See also Items 179, 191.