Harry S. Truman
July 03, 1948

Statement by the President Upon Signing Bill Relating to War Claims.
I HAVE today approved H.R. 4044, an act "To amend the Trading with the Enemy Act, as amended; to create a commission to make an inquiry and report with respect to war claims; and to provide for relief for internees in certain cases."
This measure does three things. First, it provides for the payment into the U.S. Treasury of the proceeds of German and Japanese assets seized by this Government during the war. Second, it sets up a War Claims Commission empowered and directed to make a comprehensive study and evaluation of all types of claims arising out of World War II, and directs the Commission to report to the President for submission to the Congress by March 31, 1949, its findings and recommendations on terms and means of settlement of these claims, including appropriate priorities. Finally, it provides for adjudication and payment of certain claims of American civilians, former military personnel, employees of contractors with the United States, and religious organizations in the Philippine Islands.
Because I am in hearty accord with its basic objectives, I have approved this bill. It should be pointed out, however, that the act does not provide funds to carry on the activities of the War Claims Commission, which it creates. Since no funds were appropriated for the support of the Commission, it will be impossible for the Commission to complete its study and report by March 31, 1949, as the bill requires. Further, the consideration and adjudication of specific claims, with which the Commission and the Federal Security Agency are charged, will likewise be inevitably delayed by the fact that funds for administration cannot be provided until the Congress meets again and that no benefits can be paid from the War Claims Fund until the funds realized from seized enemy assets have actually been paid into that Fund. Again, the bill directs the Federal Security Agency to make certain other types of benefit payments arising out of the war, but fails to provide additional funds either for the payment of the claims themselves or for the administrative expenses of the Federal Security Agency in passing on them.
I hope that the Congress at the earliest opportunity will act to make sufficient funds available to carry out the purposes of this act.
Note: As enacted, H.R. 4044 is Public Law 896, 80th Congress (62 Stat. 1240).