Harry S. Truman
July 08, 1947

Executive Order 9871—Regulatons Governing the Granting of Allowances for Quarters and Subsistence to Enlisted Men of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard, and Per Diem Allowances to Members of Such Services and Coast and Geodetic Survey and Public Health Service on Duty Outside the Continental United States or in Alaska
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by sections 10 and 12 of the Pay Readjustment Act of 1942, as amended (56 Stat. 363, 364, 60 Stat. 853, 858; 37 U.S.C. Sup. 110, 112), I hereby prescribe the following regulations governing the granting of (1) allowances for quarters and subsistence to enlisted men in active service in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard who are not furnished quarters or rations in kind; (2) per diem allowances in lieu of actual and necessary expenses to members of the above-mentioned services and members of the Coast and Geodetic Survey and Public Health Service on duty outside the continental United States or in Alaska, whether or not in a travel status; and (3) allowances for quarters to enlisted men of the first, second, and third grades in active service in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps or Coast Guard having dependents as defined in section 4 of the said act, for periods during which public quarters are not provided and available for such dependents:
PART I
A. Enlisted men on duty where quarters or rations in kind are not furnished shall be granted daily allowances as follows:
[INSERT TABLE, PAGE 655]
B. Upon arrival at or departure from a station where allowances for subsistence are paid, such allowances shall be computed as follows, the day to begin at midnight: For 18 hours or more at the station, one whole day; for 12 hours or more but less than 18 hours at the station, two-thirds of one day; for 6 hours or more but less than 12 hours at the station, one-third of one day. No allowance for subsistence shall be paid for the day on which a man arrives at a station after 6 o'clock P.M.
C. In determining station allowance for quarters, a fractional part of a day shall be computed as a whole day; payment for station allowance shall accrue from midnight; and station allowance shall be paid for the day of arrival at, but not for the day of departure from, a permanent station.
D. Men traveling on duty, including detentions not exceeding thirty-one days at any one place, when not furnished sleeping-car or stateroom accommodations or other quarters and rations in kind, shall be granted a daily allowance of $5.00: Provided, that when quarters in kind are furnished they shall be entitled only to an allowance for subsistence at the rate of $1.00 per meal, and when subsistence is furnished they shall be entitled only to an allowance for quarters at the rate of $2.00 per day; except that where travel is performed by rail or water, the allowance for subsistence shall be $1.25 for each meal required to be taken in a dining car on a train or in a dining room on a steamer, and if quarters are not provided for the day of such travel, the allowance for quarters shall be $1.75 when an allowance for subsistence is so furnished for one meal, $1.50 when an allowance for subsistence is so furnished for two meals, or $1.25 when an allowance for subsistence is so furnished for three meals.
E. For the purposes of this section, quarters in kind shall be considered as furnished for the day of arrival at a permanent station. Men absent under orders from their station upon duty which involves travel and also temporary detentions during the journey shall be deemed to be traveling under orders during the entire period of such absence including the day of departure therefrom and return thereto. For periods of detention in excess of thirty-one days at any one place, the allowances prescribed in Part I, A, above shall be applicable.
F. Payments of allowances for quarters and subsistence may be made to enlisted men not more than one month in advance, except that as to men proceeding to or from a station beyond the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska, such payments may be made not more than three months in advance. The heads of the departments concerned may prescribe such additional regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this paragraph.
PART II
Without regard to monetary limitations contained in the Pay Readjustment Act of 1942 as amended, the heads of the departments concerned may authorize the payment to members of their respective services on duty outside continental United States or in Alaska, whether or not in a travel status, of per diem allowances in lieu of actual and necessary expenses, considering all elements of cost of living, including cost of quarters, subsistence, and other necessary incidental expenses. Such per diem allowances shall be uniform for all the services. The heads of the departments concerned may prescribe such additional regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Part, such regulations to be uniform to the fullest extent practicable.
PART III
Each enlisted man of the first, second, or third grade in active service in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps or Coast Guard who is not entitled to a money allowance for quarters in a non-travel status under the provisions of sections 10 or 12 of the said Act of June 16 1942, and who has a dependent as defined in section 4 of the said Act, shall be entitled to receive for any period during which public quarters are not provided and available for such dependent, the money allowance for quarters prescribed for enlisted men in a non-travel status by Parts I or II above. Any such enlisted man, although receiving an allowance for quarters in a non-travel status prescribed by Parts I or II above, shall be entitled to an additional money allowance for quarters if by reason of orders of competent authority his dependent is prevented from dwelling with him, such additional money allowance for quarters to be paid at the rate prescribed in Part IA1 above: Provided, that notwithstanding any other provisions herein contained enlisted men on duty ashore, or on ships assigned home ports, outside the continental limits of the United States or in Alaska, who are otherwise entitled to a money allowance for quarters for dependents shall be paid such money allowance at the rate prescribed in Part IA1 above when their dependents have not established a residence in the locality of their respective permanent station or home port as determined under regulations prescribed by the head of the department concerned.
This order shall supersede Executive Order No. 9386 of October 15, 1943, as amended by Executive Order No. 9561 of June 1, 1945; Executive Order No. 9744-C of June 29 1946; and Executive Order No. 9825 of January 30, 1947, and shall be effective from July 1, 1947 until June 30, 1948 unless sooner modified or revoked.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

July 8, 1947