Harry S. Truman
July 01, 1952

Statement by the President on the Report of the President's Materials Policy Commission.
I HAVE today taken a number of actions to implement the report of the President's Materials Policy Commission, entitled "Resources for freedom," which was submitted to me a week ago.
This report tells the story of the needs and resources of this Nation and the nations of the free world extremely well. The document should serve for years to come as a basic guide in providing adequate supplies of the materials we and other friendly nations of the world must have if we are to expand our economy and at the same time remain secure from threats of aggression.
The Commission has done a very constructive job, and I propose to do all that I can to see to it that the Federal Government acts promptly and effectively in continuing the excellent work which the Commission has initiated. To this end I have today taken the following actions:
1. I am transmitting the Commission's report to the Congress. I am not at this time asking for action on specific recommendations, but rather I am calling the entire document to the attention of the Congress in the hope that it will be studied by each Member and by the appropriate committees of the Congress.
2. I am directing the National Security Resources Board to undertake a continuing review of the entire materials situation, as recommended in the Commission's report. The National Security Resources Board will, of course, need adequate funds if this activity is to be carried out effectively and I hope the Congress will provide needed appropriations for this vital project.
3. I am also asking the National Security Resources Board to organize a special task force recruited from various Government agencies to study the detailed recommendations of the Commission and to give me, within no more than 60 days, suggestions for carrying them out.
4. I am asking the heads of departments and agencies concerned with the materials problem to study the report and to advise me through the National Security Resources Board, within no more than 60 days, what steps they believe are appropriate in implementing these recommendations as they pertain to their respective agencies.
5. I am directing the Bureau of the Budget to make a comprehensive review, from an organizational standpoint, of the operations of the executive branch with respect to the materials problem, and to advise me of its findings within no more than 60 days.
The Government, of course, can only do a part of the job. Much of it will have to be done by private industry. Labor organizations, farm groups, and other private bodies can help work out solutions. The universities and private foundations can make a very significant contribution. It is my hope that both public and private groups will join together in the vital task of making certain that in the years to come through wise use of their resources the United States and the nations of the free world will enjoy continued growth and security.
Note: See also Items 179, 192.