Harry S. Truman
July 24, 1948

Statement by the President Reviewing Two Years of Experience With the Atomic Energy Act.
TODAY the Fourth Semiannual Report of the Atomic Energy Commission is made public, almost on the eve of the second anniversary of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946. Every thoughtful person should become familiar with this report. Atomic energy is not only the Government's business; it is the vital concern of every citizen.
Two years have elapsed since the Atomic Energy Act became law, and it is now possible to see in true perspective the wisdom of that legislation. Rarely has the writing of a statute so challenged this Nation's political courage and integrity. Never before has a nation victorious in war, and unequalled in power, demonstrated more concretely its devotion to peace and social progress.
The Atomic Energy Act stands upon four policy points. The first is that since a free society places the civil authority above the military power, the control of atomic energy properly belongs in civilian hands. The second is that until the technology of atomic energy is better understood and safeguards are devised to reduce the hazards of its use, the normal role of private enterprise in the development of a natural resource must be restrained, and public ownership maintained. The third point is that until controls are established on the international level to prevent the military use of atomic energy, we cannot, as a nation, afford to disclose the secrets which make this new force the most deadly form of military weapon. The fourth policy point is that we must not relax our efforts to probe deeper into the facts of nature to derive increasing knowledge of atomic energy, both to supplement our defenses and to open new opportunities for peaceful progress.
As to the first of these principles, I have concerned myself since becoming President, with the difficult problem of balancing the civilian and military interests in atomic energy. It was my grave responsibility to make the decision which resulted in the first use of atomic weapons in time of war. Ever since that time, I have sought to eliminate atomic weapons as instruments of war, by seeking through the United Nations to put the control of the dangerous aspects of atomic energy beyond the reach of any individual nation. At the same time, without losing hope of achieving international control, I have directed that every effort be made toward maintaining the leading position of the United States in the knowledge of nuclear energy and its military applications.
Today we possess powerful atomic weapons. The recent tests conducted jointly by the Atomic Energy Commission and the armed services in the Pacific have demonstrated beyond any question that our position in the field of atomic weapons has been substantially improved. Such advances vindicate the faith of the American people in the principle of civilian control of atomic energy.
The progress which has been achieved under the present allocation of responsibilities is itself strong proof of the capacity of civilians and military men to work together in common cause.
As President of the United States, I regard the continued control of all aspects of the atomic energy program, including research, development, and the custody of atomic weapons, as the proper functions of the civil authorities. Congress has recognized that the existence of this new weapon places a grave responsibility on the President as to its use in the event of a national emergency. There must, of course, be very close cooperation between the civilian Commission and the Military Establishment. Both the military authorities and the civilian Commission deserve high commendation for the joint efforts which they are putting forward to maintain our Nation's leadership in this vital work.
The Government of the United States holds in trust all our fissionable materials and production facilities. These are being used, on an increasing scale, to speed the discovery of applications of atomic energy to industry, agriculture, and public health. The Atomic Energy Commission reports that recent experiments hold out the promise of more efficient production on the farm and in the factory and of an increase of mechanical and human energy for doing the world's work. While this program is directed by an agency of the Government, the plants and laboratories are operated by leading industrial and research organizations through contracts with the Federal Government. I hope that, in due course, the Government will be able to permit greater participation by private industry in the development of atomic energy. When that time arrives, our industries and research organizations will be well prepared to carry forward the applications 'of atomic energy which will provide better living and better health for our people.
Secrecy is always distasteful to a free people. In scientific research, it is a handicap to productivity. But our need for security in an insecure world compels us, at the present time, to maintain a high order of secrecy in many of our atomic energy undertakings.
When the nations of the world are prepared to join with us in the international control of atomic energy, this requirement of secrecy will disappear. Our Government has sought, through its representatives on the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission, to find a common basis for understanding with the other member nations. However, the uncompromising refusal of the Soviet Union to participate in a workable control system has thus far obstructed progress.
The Atomic Energy Act has stood the test of 2 years of administration. There is no reason to question the sound basis on which it rests. In 2 years, the world has found no ready answers to the problem of war and peace. Atomic energy, therefore, remains a fearful instrument of destruction and a wonderful invitation to progress through peace.
Note: The Fourth Semiannual Report of the Atomic Energy Commission is printed in Senate Document 199 (80th Cong., 2d sess.).