Harry S. Truman
July 03, 1947

Special Message to the Congress on the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of the Pacific Islands.
To the Congress of the United States:
I wish to recommend to the Congress action enabling this Government to approve the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of the Pacific Islands which was approved unanimously by the Security Council of the United Nations on April 2, 1947. There is attached a letter from the Secretary of State enclosing a copy of the Trusteeship Agreement and a memorandum with reference to its negotiation in the Security Council.
The Trusteeship Agreement was proposed by the United States to the Security Council and approved by the Council with certain changes which were acceptable to the United States Government. Its terms are in conformity with the policy of this Government and with its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. The terms of the Agreement make ample provision for the political, economic, social, and educational development of the inhabitants of the Trust Territory, and at the same time fully protect the security interests of the United States.
The United States has taken an active role from the beginning in the establishment of the trusteeship system of the United Nations. I believe, therefore, that it would be only fitting, as well as in the interest of the inhabitants of the islands, that the Trusteeship Agreement should be brought into force as soon as possible.
I have given special consideration to whether the attached Trusteeship Agreement should be submitted to the Congress for action by a joint resolution or by the treaty process. I am satisfied that either method is constitutionally permissible and that the agreement resulting will be of the same effect internationally and under the supremacy clause of the Constitution whether advised and consented to by the Senate or whether approval is authorized by a joint resolution. The interest of both Houses of Congress in the execution of this Agreement is such, however, that I think it would be appropriate for the Congress, in this instance, to take action by a joint resolution in authorizing this Government to bring the Agreement into effect.
I hope that the Congress may give early consideration to this matter.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The text of the trusteeship agreement and related documents is printed in House Document 378 (80th Cong., 1st sess.).
For the President's statement upon signing a bill authorizing approval of the agreement, see Item 151.