Harry S. Truman
June 20, 1949

Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 1 of 1949 Establishing a Department of Welfare.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1949, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Reorganization Act of 1949. This plan will provide for a Department of Welfare to take its place among the principal executive departments of the Government. This new Department will perform the functions and conduct the programs now administered by the Federal Security Agency. Responsibility and authority for the administration of these programs will be vested in the Secretary of Welfare.
The creation of a Department of Welfare is long overdue. President Harding first recommended to the Congress the establishment of such a department in 1923. In 1937 President Roosevelt's Committee on Administrative Management likewise recommended the establishment of a Department of Social Welfare. More recently, the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government has recommended the creation of a department to administer the social security and education functions of the Federal Government.
The foundation for the Department of Welfare was laid in 1939 with the establishment of the Federal Security Agency. With respect to this action the Senate Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments stated in its Report on the Reorganization Act of 1949 that "the Federal Security Agency should have been designated an Executive Department" at the time of its creation; but the Reorganization Act then in effect did not permit such action. A second step was taken by Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1946, which transferred additional related activities to the Federal Security Agency and strengthened its internal organization. Again, the Reorganization Act then in effect did not authorize the designation of the Agency as an executive department. However, I stated in my message accompanying that plan:
"... but, while this step is important in itself, I believe that a third step should soon be taken. The time is at hand when that agency should be converted into an executive department."

Since then I have several times proposed that the Federal Security Agency be made an executive department.
The central purpose of the Federal Security Agency is the conservation and development of the human resources of the nation. Plainly, as I stated in my message transmitting Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1946:
"The size and scope of the Federal Security Agency and the importance of its functions call for departmental status and a permanent place in the President's Cabinet." In number of personnel and volume of expenditures it now exceeds several of the existing executive departments. The range of its programs and the significance of their impact upon national development obviously entitle it to a place in the highest rank of Federal organizations.
On May 9th of this year, when it appeared probable that the reorganization legislation would not permit the establishment of a new department, I urged the Congress to enact a measure creating a Department of Welfare. Since that restriction was later eliminated from the Bill and the Reorganization Act of 1949 authorizes the establishment of an executive department, I have concluded that the reorganization plan procedure affords the simplest and most expeditious method of creating a Department of Welfare.
In order to improve the administration of the Department, the plan consolidates in the Secretary of Welfare the functions now vested in the various officers and units of the Federal Security Agency and authorizes him to delegate their performance to appropriate officers and units of the Department. Thus, it carries out two of the cardinal recommendations of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, namely, that the department heads should control and have full responsibility for the conduct of their departments and that they should have authority to organize their departments. Such authority will enable the Secretary to work out the most effective distribution of the work of the Department and will contribute both to efficiency and economy in administration and to the convenience of State agencies and the public in dealing with the Department.
After investigation I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in this plan is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2(a) Of the Reorganization Act of 1949. I also have found and declare that by reason of these reorganizations it is necessary to include in the plan provisions for the appointment and compensation of a Secretary of Welfare to head the Department of Welfare and of an Undersecretary and three Assistant Secretaries to assist him in the proper performance of the heavy duties involved in the direction of the Department.
In submitting this reorganization plan, I am fully aware of the recommendations of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government with respect to the various units of the Federal Security Agency. Among these are proposals for certain transfers to or from other agencies. In Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1949, which I am transmitting today, I am providing for one of the most important of these transfers. The other proposals are currently under study, but final conclusions have not yet been reached with respect to them. The establishment of the Department of Welfare will effectuate the one recommendation of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government for the creation of a new executive department. It will not in any wise interfere with the presentation of additional reorganization plans with respect to other recommendations of the Commission in this field or with the ability of the Congress to deal with any of them by statute.
The reorganizations included in this plan will provide for greater flexibility of internal organization, clearer responsibility, and more effective administration of the functions of the new Department. The benefits in improved service and lower costs will flow from the administrative actions made possible by the plan rather than immediately from the plan itself. Over a period it is probable that substantial reductions in expenditures will result in comparison with those which otherwise will be necessary, but it is not practicable at this time to itemize such reductions.
The creation of a Department of Welfare represents a sound and much needed step in the improvement of Federal organization. It provides appropriate recognition for the related and highly important functions which the Government carries on to advance the welfare of its people. I urge that the Congress allow this reorganization plan to become effective.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: Reorganization Plan 1 of 1949 is printed in House Document 222 (81st Cong., 1st sess.). It did not become effective.