Harry S. Truman
June 25, 1952

Remarks to the Washington Student Citizenship Seminar.
IT IS a pleasure again to receive this group, and I hope that they are enjoying their visit, and getting a lot of information about the Government of the United States while they are here.
You are in the White House Rose Garden, where all the greats are received, and where medals are pinned on. I had a medal pinning yesterday.
Behind you is the White House, which is not the proper name for the house. I don't suppose many of you know what the right name of it is. It is "The President's House." All the silver is engraved with "The President's House," and whenever anybody comes to dinner and takes a souvenir--that is, a piece of silver--he can be caught up with because it says "The President's House" on it.
The balcony over there is in sight, as you can see, and was constructed to finish the architectural view of the White House on the south facade. If you go down in the yard far enough you will find that it belongs there--as did all those who opposed it, finally, when it was constructed.
I hope that you have a chance to visit the various functions of the Government, and see just how they do function. I had my nephew--my brother's oldest boy--here with his four children, and they went to the Senate and the House, and the FBI, and the Bureau of Engraving, and various other places--to Washington's home down at Mount Vernon, and over in Arlington to visit Lee's home. You will find a great many places to visit around here, if you haven't seen them, and they will entertain you and give you information both about your Government and about the history of this great country of ours.
I hope all of you are students of history, and I hope every one of you can name the Presidents from Washington to date, and can tell just how they came to be elected and on what platforms and what party elected them. If you can do that, then you are good students of history.
I hope you enjoy yourselves very much while you are here.
Note: The President spoke at 12:48 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House.