Harry S. Truman
June 20, 1949

Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 3 of 1949: Post Office Department.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1949, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Reorganization Act of 1949. This plan constitutes an important first step in strengthening the organization of the Post Office Department.
One of the prime essentials of good departmental administration is authority from the Congress to a department head to organize and control his department. The Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government emphasized in its first and subsequent reports that separate authorities to subordinates should be eliminated. The plan gives the Postmaster General the necessary authority to organize and control his department by transferring to him the functions of all subordinate officers and agencies of the Post Office Department, including the functions of each Assistant Postmaster General, the Purchasing Agent, the Comptroller and the Bureau of Accounts. The Postmaster General is authorized to delegate to subordinates designated by him such of his functions as he may deem appropriate.
The Postmaster General is responsible for the management of one of the world's largest businesses. Like the head of any large business, the Postmaster General should be given adequate top level assistance in carrying on the operations of the Department so that he may have time to devote to matters of departmental and public policy. In order to provide needed assistance to the Postmaster General, the plan establishes the positions of Deputy Postmaster General, and four Assistant Postmasters General, comparable to the positions of Undersecretary and Assistant Secretaries in other departments.
The plan also establishes an Advisory Board for the Post Office Department composed of the Postmaster General, the Deputy Postmaster General, and seven other members representing the public, who shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Advisory Board will make available to the Postmaster General the advice of outstanding private citizens and will afford a useful channel for the interchange of views between postal officials and the public concerning the operations of the postal service.
I have found after investigation that each reorganization contained in the plan is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2(a) of the Reorganization Act of 1949. I have also found and hereby declare that by reason of the reorganization made by this plan, it is necessary to include in the plan provisions for the appointment and compensation of the Deputy Postmaster General, four Assistant Postmasters General, and members of the Advisory Board for the Post Office Department. The plan abolishes the Bureau of Accounts of the Post Office Department and the offices of Comptroller, Purchasing Agent, First, Second, Third, and Fourth Assistant Postmasters General.
This plan carries into effect those of the recommendations of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government respecting the Post Office Department which can be accomplished under the provisions of the Reorganization Act. I am also transmitting to the Congress recommendations for legislation which will implement other recommendations of the Commission and place the operations of the Post Office Department on a more businesslike basis.
The primary result of this reorganization plan will be more effective administration. Although a substantial reduction in expenditures will not be brought about by the plan alone, major economies can be achieved over a period of time as a result of this plan and the enactment of the postal legislation which I am recommending to the Congress.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: Reorganization Plan 3 of 1949 is published in the U.S. Statutes at Large (63 Stat. 1066) and in the 1949-1953 Compilation of title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (p. 999). It became effective on August 20, 1949.