Harry S. Truman
June 12, 1947

The President's Special News Conference With Prime Minister Mackenzie King Near Ottawa
THE PRESIDENT. I want to say to you that this Canadian trip has been most interesting to me. I think it is an event in the history of the two countries. I think we understand each other better as a result of this visit, and I sincerely hope that the Canadians will pay us a visit. There isn't a chance in the world of our being able to give them the sort of reception that they have given me, but we do the best we can.
Our objective, of course, in the visit to Mexico and in the visit to Canada, is to solidify the friendship of the people who live on this continent. We want to do that for the whole Western Hemisphere, and then we want to do it for the whole world.
We have only one objective, and that is peace in the world for the benefit of all the peoples of the world. Unless we can do that, all the men who died in both our world wars died in vain. Unless we can do that, all the men who died in both the world wars died in vain. I repeat that. Because that is exactly what it means. The United States has but one objective in view, and that is peace in the world, and friendship with every nation in the world, and underline that every.
That's all I have to say, gentlemen.
Q. Thank you very much, sir.
THE PRESIDENT. Lovely place.
Q. Direct quotes?
THE PRESIDENT. You can say "the President said."
Q. No direct quotes, Mr. President?
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think you ought to make it direct quotes.
Q. Thank you so much for coming over.
THE PRIME MINISTER. I want to say, on behalf of the Canadian Government, that every sentiment that the President expressed is reechoed in the hearts of all of us who had the great pleasure of meeting him, seeing him, and talking to him on his delightful visit to our country.
THE PRESIDENT. I wasn't trying to put you on the record, but you went on record. [Laughter]
THE PRESIDENT. I am going to keep alongside you, as good neighbors.
Reporter: Thank you, Mr. President.
Note: President Truman's special news conference with Prime Minister Mackenzie King was held on the lawn of the Seignory Club at Monte-Bello, Ontario, at 3:50 p.m. The meeting is listed in the records of the White House Official Reporter as the President's one hundred and ninth news conference.