Harry S. Truman
June 29, 1951

Executive Order 10264—Transfer of the Administration of American Samoa from the Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of the Interior
WHEREAS THE Island of Tutuila of the Samoan group and all other islands of the group east of longitude 171 degrees west of Greenwich, known as American Samoa, were placed under the control of the Department of the Navy by Executive Order No. 125-A of February 19, 1900; and
WHEREAS the joint resolution of February 20, 1929, 45 Stat. 1253, provides that until the Congress shall provide for the government of such islands all civil, judicial, and military powers shall be vested in such person or persons and shall be exercised in such manner as the President of the United States may direct; and
WHEREAS a committee composed of the Secretaries of State, War, the Navy, and the Interior recommended on June 18, 1947, that administrative responsibility for American Samoa be transferred to a civilian agency of the Government at the earliest practicable date as determined by the President; and
WHEREAS plans for the orderly transfer of administrative responsibility for American Samoa from the Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of the Interior are embodied in a memorandum of understanding between the Department of the Navy and the Department of the Interior, approved by me on September 23, 1949, and it is the view of the two departments, as expressed in that memorandum, that such transfer should take effect on or about July 1, 1951; and
WHEREAS the transfer of administration of American Samoa from the Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of the Interior, effective July 1, 1951, appears to be in the public interest:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the said joint resolution of February 20, 1929, and as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
1. The administration of American Samoa is hereby transferred from the Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of the Interior, such transfer to become effective on July 1, 1951.
2. The Department of the Navy and the Department of the Interior shall proceed with the plans for the transfer of administration of American Samoa as embodied in the above-mentioned memorandum of understanding between the two departments.
3. When the transfer of administration made by this order becomes effective, the Secretary of the Interior shall take such action as may be necessary and appropriate, and in harmony with applicable law, for the administration of civil government in American Samoa.
4. The executive departments and agencies of the Government are authorized and directed to cooperate with the Departments of the Navy and Interior in the effectuation of the provisions of this order.
5. The said Executive order of February 19, 1900, is revoked, effective July 1, 1951.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

June 29, 1951