Harry S. Truman
June 14, 1947

Statement by the President on the Treaty of Peace With Italy.
WITH the ratification of the Treaty of Peace with Italy we bring to a close an unhappy chapter in Italian-American relations. At the same time we mark the beginning of a new era for Italy to which the Italian people can look with hope and confidence. Certain of the terms of the treaty are not in full accord with our desires. But the reestablishment of peace does provide a foundation for building anew a strong, free, and democratic Italy. And within the framework of the United Nations it should be possible to secure such changes in the treaty clauses as may be required in the light of future experience.
From the first days of the Allied liberation of Italy we found the Italian people as eager as we ourselves to destroy the tyrannies of fascism and nazism which had despoiled their country and destroyed their liberties. Marching by our side against the common foe, the Italian armed forces and the Italian people contributed mightily to the ultimate victory. This common sacrifice has strengthened the deep and lasting friendship between our two peoples. More than this, Americans have the satisfaction of standing at the side of Italy while her people, through adversity, are rebuilding with their own labors a new democracy and restoring their lost freedoms. During these most difficult years we have been able to do much to help the Italians to help themselves.
In order that their victory, and ours, may be preserved--in order that their freedoms and their reborn democracy may live and grow as Italy again takes her rightful place of honor and leadership among the free nations of the world--Americans will continue to stand by the side of their Italian friends, to work with them in our common efforts to rebuild and to restore a free world at peace.
Note: The treaty and related papers are published in the U.S. Statutes at Large (61 Stat. 1245). The treaty entered into force September 15, 1947.