Harry S. Truman
June 27, 1946

The President's News Conference
THE PRESIDENT. [1.] First I want to announce that Captain Clifford has been made Special Counsel to the President. He has been acting in that capacity nearly all the time since Judge Rosenman left; and Captain James H. Foskett, U.S. Navy, will be the new Naval Aide to the President. There are mimeographed sheets telling all about both of these gentlemen that you can have when you go out.
[2.] The Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion prepared a statement on the food record which we have made, that is rather impressive. We have shipped, in 6 months, over five and a half million tons of bread grains to help feed the hungry people in other lands. In another 3 weeks we shall have met our half-year goal of six million tons.
But the crisis is not over yet, and will not be over when we reach our half-year goal. Cooperation and determined effort by the public--by each one of us--must be continued during the coming 6 months of hunger ahead.
Soon after July 1st, I will receive from the Secretary of Agriculture final figures not only on food grains but on the entire contribution of the United States toward meeting the world food needs during the last full year.
We have made a real record on that, and are continuing to make it, so if we have had to do without a little bread here and there, we can feel assured that we have kept people from starving by doing that.
This full report of Mr. Snyder is the last one he made before he left. It will be available for you in mimeographed form, and covers the whole program of what has happened in regard to the food situation.1
1 See Item 144.
That's all the announcements I have to make.
[3.] Q. Mr. President, have you any ideas on whether UNRRA relief to Russia contained provisions about publicity?
THE PRESIDENT. I suggest that you take that up with the State Department. They are handling it.
[4.] Q. Mr. President, last week you said that Governor Tugwell would stay in Puerto Rico. He has arrived in town, and says he plans to quit Sunday. Any comment ?
THE PRESIDENT. I didn't know he was here. I haven't seen him yet. I will talk to him first.
[5.] Q. Mr. President, are you going to seize the Allis-Chalmers--
THE PRESIDENT. We have had it under consideration, but we haven't decided yet to seize it. I think probably it can be settled without a seizure. I hope so.
[6.] Q. Mr. President, do you intend to go on the air, sir, in connection with your approval or rejection of the OPA legislation ?
THE PRESIDENT. I will have to make that decision when I get the bill. It is unfortunate it has been so long in reaching me.
[7.] Q. Have you received any more Macedonian cries from Senator Tobey, sir? [Laughter]
THE PRESIDENT. Probably won't.
Q. Any comment on his statement and letter yesterday?2
THE PRESIDENT. The letter speaks for itself.
2 Senator Tobey's remarks in the Senate on June 26, including letters exchanged with the president, are printed in the Congressional Record (vol. 92, P. 7559). Senator Tobey's letter, which begins with the words "This is a Macedonian cry" is an appeal for grain for the poultry of New Hampshire.
Q. Did you consider the letter confidential, Mr. President?
THE PRESIDENT. I used to consider Presidential letters confidential. I don't any more. [Laughter]
Q. You haven't any comment, Mr. President, on his comment?
THE PRESIDENT. No comment. The letter speaks for itself.
[8.] Q. Mr. President, do you expect Mr. Bowles to remain in office after the OPA bill?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I hope he will. Mr. Bowles has been trying to quit ever since he came here. The first thing he did was to send me a letter of resignation, and come in and say that he wanted to quit. He has been anxious to return to Connecticut, but I have held him on and on. Maybe I can succeed in keeping him further.
[9.] Q. Mr. President, the President of Chile1died last night. I was wondering have you any comment to make?
THE PRESIDENT. Of course I am very sorry to hear it, and we are sending the proper condolences.
1Juan Antonio Rios.
He was a very fine gentleman. He spent a night with me in the White House, and we thought very highly of him.
[10.] Q. Mr. President, Senator McKellar has not taken any action on this economic board set up under the full employment bill. Some people seem to think that he is holding off in an attempt to make sure that you make some pretty conservative appointments to this full employment board. Have you any comment on any such supposition?
THE PRESIDENT. You had better talk to Senator McKellar about that. I can't read Senator McKellar's mind. You want me to read Senator McKellar's mind? I can't do that.
Q. When will you have your own appointments ?
THE PRESIDENT. I have been trying to get them ever since the bill came up to me. It has been a difficult matter to get them to accept the position.2
2For appointments to the board (Council of Economic Advisers) see Items 177 [2] and 183.
Q. Mr. President, you have repeatedly touched on that one point--in fragments-about it being difficult to get men, and about good men leaving. I wonder if there is something you would care to say in amplification of that--

THE PRESIDENT, No.
Q.--how many men have you tried to get into the Government, and how many have turned it down?
THE PRESIDENT. I haven't kept track of--
Q. Dozens or scores?
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, it would run into 20 or 30.
Q. What is the reason?
THE PRESIDENT. Most of them are making so much money they didn't like to work for the Government at the pecuniary salaries of Government people, and patriotism does not appeal in peacetime as it does in war.
Q. I was just wondering if George W. Taylor, former War Labor Board head, has been considered for full employment
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, he was asked to take a place on it, and he can't leave.
Q. He can't?

Q. How about Mr. Parten, has he been offered the job?
THE PRESIDENT. Who?
Q. Mr. Parten of Houston, Tex.?
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, he was offered the job. He is making so much money he can't afford to come back with the Government.
[11.] Q. Mr. President, when will the McKeever report be available; that is, the Director of Liquidation--
THE PRESIDENT. I haven't received the report from him. When it has gone the rounds, I suppose I will receive one. It will be available as soon as his job terminates, which is the 1st of July.
[12.] Q. Mr. President, what do you think of the manner in which Russia used her veto power in the United Nations recently?
THE PRESIDENT. I have no comment on that.
[13.] Q. Mr. President, is there any report of progress from London on the Palestine matter?
THE PRESIDENT. No.
[14.] Q. Mr. President, is the appointment of Budget Director in sight, sir?
THE PRESIDENT. No it isn't, at the present time.
Q. It was reported yesterday that the job had been offered to Gael Sullivan. Any comment on that, sir?

HE PRESIDENT. No comment.
[15.] Q. Mr. President, can you give us any background on the orders which sent the American cruiser Fargo to Trieste?
THE PRESIDENT. No I can't. I have no comment to make on that.
[16.] Q. Have you decided what you are going to do on the Hobbs bill ?
THE PRESIDENT. The Hobbs bill is not before me yet, Duke.1When it comes up here, I will make up my mind. It's now going the rounds of the various departments for the usual comments that they have to make before the bill comes before me.
1 Duke Shoop of the Kansas City Stat.
[17.] Q. Have you talked to Secretary Byrnes this morning on the Paris conference ?
THE PRESIDENT. Yes I have.
Q. Is there anything you could say for--
THE PRESIDENT. Not a thing.
[18.] Q. Mr. President, is there any possibility you will go to San Francisco for the Shrine meeting out there?
THE PRESIDENT. I can't go.
Q. Can't go?
THE PRESIDENT. I can't go. Much to my regret. I would like to go.
Q. Are you going anywhere, any time soon, Mr. President?
THE PRESIDENT. No, I am not. [Laughter] There isn't a chance of my going anywhere, any time soon--[more laughter]--I am sorry to say.

Reporter: Well, thank you, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT. All right.
Note: President Truman's seventy-first news conference was held in his office at the White House at 10:30 a.m. on Thursday, June 27, 1946.