Harry S. Truman
March 19, 1947

Special Message to the Congress on Export Controls.
To the Congress of the United States:
In my message to the Congress on January 31, 1947, concerning the extension of specified parts of the Second War Powers Act, I stated that it was desirable to delay any communication on the subject of the control of this country's exports until it became clear whether or not an extension of such controls would be necessary, beyond June 30, 1947.
Further review of domestic and world supplies has now convinced me that this Government must continue its control over the export of products in critically short supply here and abroad, in order to protect the economy of the United States as well as to discharge our international responsibilities. The situation, although essentially temporary in character, will certainly remain acute for some time to come.
As a result of the war, many nations have been stripped of essential supplies and their productive capacity has been curtailed. Foreign demands for these supplies are therefore extremely large. Prices of many commodities in other countries are far above present levels in the United States. Uncontrolled exports of food products would result in a marked increase in the already substantial burden of living costs borne by the American people. Unlimited export of feeds, seeds and fertilizers would make extremely difficult the achievement of the food production goals which we have asked American farmers to meet and would increase the cost of production of farm products.
This country is the great undamaged center of industrial production to which the whole world looks for materials of every kind. Our steel, lumber, building materials, industrial chemicals and many other basic industrial commodities are sought throughout the world. Shortages of many of these commodities restrict our own domestic production of other essential products. Unrestrained export would inevitably limit the level of our own industrial production and employment. Furthermore, there are instances in which we wish to direct exports to those countries which produce commodities essential to our own economy. Thus, limited amounts of equipment have been directed to certain countries to increase the production of tin, hard fibres, sugar, and fats and oils.
Serious as would be the effect of unlimited and completely undirected exports upon a nation still troubled by many shortages, our domestic problems are not the only ones which lead me to urge upon the Congress a further extension of export controls. The United States has become a nation with world-wide responsibilities. During a period of world shortages, the distribution of this country's exports has serious international significance. If we retain the ability to channel commercial exports of critically scarce materials, we can permit export of these products to countries whose need is greatest while still protecting the United States from excessive export drains. Our international responsibilities cannot be fulfilled without this machinery. In its absence, foreign purchasing would tend to be concentrated on those commodities in greatest world shortage. Not only would our domestic supply and price structure be seriously affected, but the commodities would go to destinations where the need is comparatively less pressing.
Furthermore, we have granted loans and other monetary aid to nations whose existence must be preserved. These loans will accomplish their purpose only if the recipient nations are able to obtain critically needed supplies from this country. Export control is an important instrument in carrying out the purpose of these loan programs.
The record clearly shows that this authority over exports has been exercised in the past only with respect to those commodities in critically short supply and that, as rapidly as the supply situation has improved, commodities have been removed from control. The list of items subject to export control has been reduced from a wartime peak of over 3,000 to approximately 725 on October 1, 1946, and approximately 500 at the present time. We will continue to remove export controls as rapidly as the supply situation permits. I look forward to the day when the United States and other countries can remove these interferences to the free flow of commodities in world trade. But the danger of immediate and complete decontrol in the face of continuing domestic and world scarcities is too great for this nation to undertake at this time.
I therefore, recommend that the authority derived from the Export Control Act be extended for a period of one year beyond its present expiration date, June 30, 1947. It is essential that this extension be made well in advance of this date. Delay would prove unsettling to business and would handicap the planning and execution of our food and other export programs. Effective administration of the export control orders requires the assurance of continuity in operations. I urge upon the Congress prompt action in extending this authority.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: An extension to July 15, 1947, of certain export controls was provided for by a joint resolution approved by the President on June 30, 1947 (61 Stat. 214), and a further extension to February 29, 1948, by the Second Decontrol Act of 1947, approved July 15, 1947 (61 Stat. 321).