Harry S. Truman
March 02, 1949

Statement by the President: The 100th Anniversary of the Department of the Interior.
THE 100th anniversary of the Department of the Interior is an appropriate occasion to examine the status of our natural resources and to renew our efforts to protect, develop, and maintain these as a continuing stabilizing force in the preservation of our democracy.
In our present economy the task of conservation is not to lock up our resources but to develop and improve them. I urge that the Nation push forward vigorously with irrigation, hydroelectric power, flood control, recreational and other resource development programs of the Department of the Interior and with all other related resource conservation activities. Full development of our river basin resources can provide the raw ingredients needed for a constantly expanding and thriving national economy if the benefits are widely distributed to the people. Failure to make investments necessary to support a sound conservation program would be false economy. Despite the ruthless exploitation of our natural heritage which frequently marked the past, this country today has sufficient resources, if conserved and wisely developed.
The Department of the Interior, originally known as the Home Department, was established on March 3, 1849. This department has since developed into the official steward of a great part of our natural resources. The public domain, including range and forest lands, production of electric power and irrigation water from western rivers, fostering of fish and wildlife, maintenance of our beautiful national parks, and development of mineral resources, both private and public, are all part of Interior's conservation responsibility.
Conservation progress has not been easy. There have been backward marches and occasional defeats. But each time the movement has started up with new strength. In the first hundred years, we have learned what to do for conservation of resources. In the years ahead we must profit from the experience we have gained through these 10 decades.