Harry S. Truman
March 14, 1946

Statement by the President Concerning the Reemployment of Veterans.
DEMOBILIZATION is now reaching its peak and the rapid reemployment of our discharged servicemen is a matter of high national importance. While some veterans appreciate a brief period of rest after returning home, the success or failure of a veteran's readjustment to civilian life depends ultimately upon his getting a suitable job--promptly and without unnecessary shopping around.
All employers, as well as the agencies of Government, share responsibility for seeing to it that the veteran's and the displaced war worker's search for employment is not made unnecessarily burdensome.
Of all the Federal agencies concerned with the veteran's problems, the USES has the primary responsibility for expediting his employment. Furthermore, it is the only agency of the Government which has the facilities to speed up the veteran's and the displaced war worker's reemployment. It can eliminate wasteful and unnecessary job hunting. It provides information about and placement on jobs in the home town or across the country. It is a vital reconversion tool. But the USES cannot create jobs. That is the function of private employers. The USES can play its vital role in speeding the readjustment of the veteran and the displaced war worker only if employers throughout the Nation list their job openings with local offices of the USES.
Such action is doubly advantageous. It helps job seekers everywhere in the country to apply for the best available job with a minimum of effort; and it helps employers everywhere in the country to interview and employ persons best qualified to fill their job openings.
In the interest of expediting the reemployment process, I urge all employers everywhere to list their job openings with the USES--and to do so without delay. By this means, employers can assist the Government to give to our returning veterans and to displaced war workers the employment service to which they are entitled.