Harry S. Truman
March 30, 1952

Remarks at a Reception by the Democratic National Committee.
THANK YOU very, very much for this cordial reception. You have always given me a cordial reception. Even when the pollsters said I didn't have a friend in the United States, I still had the Democrats with me, and I hope they will always continue to feel just that way.
There is one thing I overlooked last night. I failed to say, after I had made the announcement that I did not intend to run for reelection, that I will be just as enthusiastically working for the Democratic ticket as if I were on it.
You have a wonderful chairman, and I am just as sure as I stand here that the Democratic convention in July will nominate a winner.
I will be in there, just the same as if I were the nominee--because I am that kind of Democrat.
All the career that I have ever had--if I have had one--I owe to the Democratic Party, and I am not a fair day Democrat, I am a fair deal Democrat. And I like to see the people who get the rewards also take the punishment that goes with them. And that is what you have to do, if you are a good Democrat.
Now the Democratic Party is, as I said last night, the salvation of the world and of this great country of ours. And we must not, under any circumstances, let down on that theory. I wish it were possible for me to personally shake hands with each one of you and give you a personal greeting and a thank you for your having come here to make this the greatest and most successful Democratic dinner we have ever had in the history of the country.
Now we want to have many more of this same sort, from one end of the country to the other. We want to elect a Democratic Congress. We want to elect a Democratic Senate, and we want to elect Democratic Governors. And I want every one of you to get in there and pitch and do it; and I shall be pounding you on the back from now until that first Tuesday in November to see that that is done.
Again I want to thank you very much for this most cordial reception. I think I would have gotten a reception just the same if I hadn't made the announcement. I don't really believe you are cheering me because I am not going to run again. But I like it, and I am appreciative of the distances some of you have come for this purpose.
I hope you will do it again and again and again.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 4:55 p.m. in the main ballroom of the Mayflower Hotel in Washington. During his remarks he referred to Frank E. McKinney, chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
For the President's address at the Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner on March 29, see Item 69.