Harry S. Truman
March 04, 1949

Special Message to the Congress on Reorganization of the State Department.
To the Congress of the United States:
The conduct of the foreign relations of the United States has become an increasingly momentous responsibility of our Federal Government. Many of our hopes for world peace and domestic security are dependent upon the effectiveness of our machinery for the development of foreign policy and for translating policies into action.
The foreign affairs activities of this Government are carried on by a number of agencies, but the greatest share of the responsibility is borne by the Department of State. Moreover, the President, and the Congress as well, rely upon the Secretary of State to provide leadership among the Government agencies concerned with various aspects of foreign affairs and to recommend the steps necessary to achieve an integrated and consistent foreign policy.
The State Department has, for some time, recognized the need for modifications and improvements in its internal organization to enable it to discharge the increased responsibilities which have been assigned to it in the post-war period. During the past year, under the leadership of Secretary Marshall, the Department made certain urgent adjustments in its organization and undertook comprehensive studies of its long-range organizational requirements. The major recommendations arising from these studies received my approval some months ago, but were not placed in effect pending the completion of the report of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government.
The Commission has made a thorough study of our governmental machinery for the conduct of foreign affairs. With respect to the organization of the Department of State, the Commission's recommendations generally embody and endorse the organizational plans formulated by the Department. With my approval, the Secretary of State is now proceeding to put these plans into effect.
In order fully to carry out this reorganization, two changes in the statutes governing the Department are required. First, additional positions of Assistant Secretary of State should be created to permit the Department to organize its principal activities on a geographic basis and, at the same time, to maintain its requisite relationships with the Congress, and with the other Executive agencies and the international organizations. Second, certain powers vested by the Foreign Service Act of 1946 in subordinate officials should be placed in the Secretary, subject to his delegation. This action is needed to provide the Secretary with authority commensurate with his responsibilities, and further to apply the principle, strongly recommended by the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, of clarifying the lines of responsibility and authority within the Executive Branch.
Early action on these measures is desirable to strengthen this Government's resources for achieving its international objectives.
The suggestions of the Commission with regard to the personnel management of the Department of State and the Foreign Service will require additional study before recommendations can be submitted to the Congress.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: On May 26, 1949, the President signed a bill "to strengthen and improve the organization and administration of the Department of State, and for other purposes" (63 Stat. 111).
The recommendations of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government (Hoover Commission) relating to the Department of State are contained in a report entitled "Foreign Affairs," released in February 1949 (Government Printing Office: 1949, 77 pp.).