Harry S. Truman
May 23, 1952

Message to the Congress Transmitting 68th Annual Report of the U.S. Civil Service Commission.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am transmitting herewith the annual report of the Civil Service Commission for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1951.
Our national defense effort has necessitated a rapid, temporary expansion in Federal employment, particularly in the three military departments. Adapting the civil service system to meet these emergency conditions has involved many difficult problems. Nevertheless, I directed that the temporary expansion of the civil service be accomplished, to the maximum extent possible, on the basis of open competitive examinations. I am pleased that the Civil Service Commission has performed a highly creditable job in this regard, although I am most desirous that the method of making appointments through the competitive merit system be strengthened and extended as rapidly as conditions permit.
In meeting the urgent personnel needs of the Federal service, the Civil Service Commission has drawn increasingly upon women, older workers, and the physically handicapped. I am glad to note, too, that veterans constituted approximately 50 percent of the placements made during the last fiscal year.
With respect to the legislative recommendations contained in the Commission's annual report, I should like to call attention to some of the measures which will be of especial value in strengthening the civil service system. 1. The Senate has already approved S. 1135, 82d Congress, the proposed Federal Personnel Recruitment Act, providing for modernization of examining and recruitment procedures. I am hopeful that the House of Representatives will give favorable consideration to this legislation.
2. I have repeatedly recommended to the Congress the elimination of the requirement for Presidential appointment and Senate confirmation of postmasters. This recommendation is carried forward in Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1952, which is now before the Congress. In addition, Reorganization Plans No. 3 and 4 of 1952 will bring customs officials and United States marshals into the competitive service. Approval of these three reorganization plans will do much to strengthen our civil service merit system.
3. Operating experience under the Classification Act of 1949 has demonstrated a need for a larger number of positions in grades 16, 17 and 18 of the general schedule. Existing limitations on the number of positions for these grades have constituted a serious administrative problem. I again urge the Congress to take action to relieve this situation.
4. As a step toward improving the efficiency of the Federal service, the Congress should provide authority for Government agencies to assign selected personnel to educational institutions and other organizations for professional and technical training.
5. Unemployment compensation coverage should be extended to include Federal employees. This is particularly important in view of the provisions for reduction of annual leave benefits which have been enacted into law during the past year.
While these legislative recommendations are of considerable importance, there are many other areas in which the Congress and the Executive branch must work together to improve the efficiency and character of the civil service. Through our mutual efforts, I am sure we will continue to solve the many complex problems involved in securing and retaining the best qualified personnel to conduct the public business.

HARRY. S. TRUMAN
Note: The report of the Civil Service Commission is printed in House Document 281 (82d Cong. 2d sess.).