Harry S. Truman
May 17, 1951

Executive Order 10245—Establishing a Commission for the Commemoration of the One Hundred and Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the Signing of the Declaration of Independence
WHEREAS the fourth day of July in this year One Thousand Nine Hundred and Fifty-one will mark the one hundred and seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence; and
WHEREAS the ideals of the Declaration of Independence still guide the United States and give hope to the oppressed in other lands; and
WHEREAS the forces of aggression and tyranny are now threatening the utter destruction of the basic principles of freedom, both with respect to individual liberty and the liberty of free nations; and
WHEREAS the United States is today joined with other free nations in a struggle to resist aggression and tyranny and maintain peace; and
WHEREAS we the people of the United States, should carry on our efforts for peace and freedom with a fuller understanding of the great truths set forth in the Declaration of Independence, with renewed determination to maintain our cherished freedoms, and with faith and hope in that Divine Providence which has protected our country from its beginnings;
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
1. There is hereby established the Commission for the Commemoration of the One Hundred and Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the Signing of the Declaration of Independence, hereinafter referred to as the Commission.
2. The Commission shall be composed of seven members, all ex officio, as follows: The Chief Justice of the United States, as Chairman, the Vice President of the United States, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the Senate, and the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
3. It shall be the function of the Commission to plan and arrange for the appropriate commemoration, by ceremonies and otherwise, of the one hundred and seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence.
4. All executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government are authorized and directed to cooperate with the Commission in its work and to furnish the Commission such information and assistance, not inconsistent with law, as it may require in the performance of its functions.
5. When the Commission deems that its work has been completed, it shall report that fact to the President, and thereupon the Commission shall cease to exist.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

May 17, 1951