Harry S. Truman
May 07, 1952

Letter to Henry H. Fowler on His Assumption of the Post of Administrator of the Defense Production Administration.
Dear Mr. Fowler:
I am pleased to know, from your conversation with Acting Defense Mobilizer Steelman, of your willingness to assume the post of Administrator of the Defense Production Administration effective June 1, 1952, succeeding Mr. Manly Fleischmann. This appointment is subject, of course, to confirmation by the Senate.
It is my personal wish, and that of Acting Defense Mobilizer Steelman, that you occupy the Defense Production Administration post simultaneously with the position you now occupy as Administrator of the National Production Authority in the Department of Commerce. I understand from Secretary Sawyer that he also concurs in this dual responsibility for you.
While I appreciate that in taking on such a double responsibility your tasks of administration will be greatly increased, it is my feeling that in so doing it will be possible to bring under your direct guidance all production phases of the mobilization program. Very significant progress has been made in the build-up phases of our production effort. In the completion of the further build-up tasks remaining, and in the operation phase ahead, a single production head now promises to be the most effective means of overall coordination of mobilization production.
You will report directly to Acting Defense Mobilizer John R. Steelman, who agrees fully with my decision to have you occupy both the DPA and NPA Administratorships.
This appointment carries with it my appreciation of the tireless efforts you have given to the mobilization effort, both as Deputy Administrator and Administrator of the National Production Authority.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: The appointment of Mr. Fowler was approved by the Senate on May 19, 1952.
The text of Manly Fleischmann's letter of resignation and the President's letter of acceptance was also released. Mr. Fleischmann served as Defense Production Administrator from July 1951 through May 1952.