Harry S. Truman
November 29, 1950

Special Message to the Congress Urging Legislation Authorizing Further Assistance to Yugoslavia.
To the Congress of the United States:
I recommend that the Congress enact legislation authorizing further United States assistance to meet the emergency created by the food shortage in Yugoslavia.
More than two years ago the Government of Yugoslavia broke its association with the Soviet Union and its satellites. This rift resulted primarily from the refusal of the Yugoslavs to agree to the dictation of the Kremlin in the affairs of Yugoslavia. The Yugoslavs are determined to maintain their independence of the Kremlin. They are maintaining the largest fighting force in Europe, outside of the Soviet Union.
The breach between Yugoslavia and the Kremlin and its satellites has steadily widened. The Kremlin is determined to wipe out this one successful example of a former satellite which has freed itself from Soviet control. Directly and through its satellites, the Kremlin is trying to destroy Yugoslav independence. Yugoslavia is being subjected to an economic blockade, to propaganda, subversion, military pressure, and harassing border raids.
Since the break between the Kremlin and Yugoslavia, it has been the policy of this Government to assist Yugoslavia to maintain its independence. The continued independence of Yugoslavia is of great importance to the security of the United States and its partners in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and to all nations associated with them in their common defense against the threat of Soviet aggression.
This past summer Yugoslavia suffered perhaps the worst drought in its history. There were severe crop failures, and the lack of feed and fodder led to the extensive slaughtering of livestock. As a result, Yugoslavia is threatened with famine this winter. This would provide fertile ground for the subversive activities of the Kremlin and would seriously undermine the capacity of the Yugoslav people to resist Soviet aggression.
On October 20, 1950, the Yugoslav Government formally requested United States assistance in averting the worst effects of the disastrous crop failure. This request came only after the Yugoslav Government had exhausted all means of meeting the situation by its own efforts.
Immediate action was necessary to meet the situation. Shipments had to be arranged at the earliest possible date. Otherwise, it would have been impossible to get food to the more remote areas of Yugoslavia before they were isolated by the heavy winter snows.
Accordingly, this Government has taken action to begin shipments under existing authority and with funds already available. The Economic Cooperation Administration has made arrangements for the shipment of flour from Italy and Germany directly to Yugoslavia. At the same time, with the concurrence of the North Atlantic Treaty countries, Mutual Defense Assistance funds are being made available for procurement of food supplies equivalent to the immediate needs of the Yugoslav armed forces. In addition, the Export-Import Bank is permitting a portion of a previously negotiated Yugoslav loan to be used for the purchase and transport of foodstuffs, partly from American surplus stocks. Under present plans, the cost of this interim aid already underway will amount to about $30 million. This is sufficient only to meet a portion of the total need.
Now that the Congress has reconvened, I believe it appropriate to request a special authorization to meet the balance of the essential food needs of the Yugoslav people until the next harvest. Action should be taken promptly. Shipments of the remaining supplies needed must be started before the end of December, if the bulk of the food is to be available for distribution in the critical winter period. The additional aid needed is estimated at $38 million. This amount, plus the amount provided under existing authority, will only be sufficient to bring the Yugoslav diet up to a bare subsistence level.
We have received satisfactory assurances from the Yugoslav Government, first, that all assistance furnished by the United States will be given full and continuous publicity through the press and radio in Yugoslavia; second, that the aid will be distributed equitably and fairly among the Yugoslav people; and third, that this distribution will be under the observation of persons designated by the United States.
It is my earnest hope that the Congress will, at this session, provide the $38 million necessary for shipments of food to Yugoslavia. In this way we can help preserve the independence of a nation which is defying the savage threats of the Soviet imperialists, and keeping Soviet power out of one of Europe's most strategic areas. This is clearly in our national interest.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: On December 29, 1950, the president approved the Yugoslav Emergency Relief Assistance Act of 1950 (64 Stat. 1122).
See also Item 290.