Harry S. Truman
November 02, 1951

Executive Order 10302—Interdepartmental Committee on Narcotics
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, and subject to the provisions of section 214 of the Independent Offices Appropriation Act, 1946 (59 Stat. 134; 31 U.S.C. 691), it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. There is hereby established the Interdepartmental Committee on Narcotics, which shall have as members one representative of each of the Departments of the Treasury, State, Defense, Justice, and Agriculture, and of the Federal Security Agency. The head of each such department and agency shall designate the representative thereof, and shall also designate an alternate representative. The Chairman of the Committee shall be designated by the President, from among its representative members or as an additional member.
SEC. 2. It shall be the duty of the said Committee:
(a) To maintain information regarding Federal, State, and local law-enforcement action taken in connection with the illegal sale and use of narcotic drugs and marihuana, and to disseminate such information to Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies and crime commissions.
(b) To maintain information regarding the character and effects of narcotic drugs and marihuana and the nature and results of drug addiction.
(c) To examine and study problems and developments arising in the administration and enforcement, national and international, of the laws and conventions relating to narcotic drugs and marihuana.
(d) To examine and study the problems of prevention and control of drug addiction and habituation and of the treatment and rehabilitation of addicts and other habituated persons.
(e) To advise the President as to such problems and developments, and to recommend such international, national, State, and local measures as, in the opinion of the Committee, should be taken with respect to such problems.
(f) To perform such other functions, authorized or permitted by law, with respect to the enforcement of the laws relating to narcotic drugs and marihuana or with respect to other matters within the scope of this section as the President may direct.
SEC. 3. All executive departments and agencies of the Government are requested to cooperate with the said Committee and to furnish it such available information as it may require for the performance of its duties; but this order shall not be construed as otherwise modifying the functions or responsibilities of any such department or agency.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
THE WHITE HOUSE,
November 2, 1951