Harry S. Truman
November 29, 1946

Letter Accepting Resignation of Paul Porter as Price Administrator.
Dear Paul:
I have your letter of November fifteenth and accept with reluctance, effective at the close of business on December 4, 1946, your resignation as Administrator of the Office of Price Administration. I told you when I assigned you to this post last February that you would face insurmountable difficulties and frustrations but that it was a task that had to be carried on so long as the Congress gave us authority and the people of the Nation needed support. You have completed your assignment with competence and outstanding devotion to the public welfare. For this your country owes you a debt of gratitude and as your President I commend you for a job well done.
We both had grave reservations as to the effectiveness of the extension bill which I signed on July twenty-fifth last; but I am confident that history will vindicate the wisdom of the decision to carry on for a while longer even with the inadequate powers which the Congress gave. The danger of ruinous postwar inflation is much lessened by the efforts which you and your associates have made in the critical months since price control was extended. Indeed there is no cause for pessimism over the economic outlook for the future if management and labor will under freedom from direct government controls demonstrate the kind of patriotic concern for the common good which has characterized your administration of OPA.
I can understand the reasons which impel you to return to private activity. Since the war began you have given your government unselfish service at personal sacrifice and I cannot rightfully insist that you remain in the federal service longer.
However, I do want to call upon you for such specific assignments as your private responsibilities will permit you to accept. You have demonstrated, under terrific pressure, qualities of leadership and understanding of public problems of which this country will have a continuing need. My best wishes go with you in your future endeavors.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: Mr. Porter served as Administrator, Office of Price Administration, from February 21, 1946, through December 4, 1946. His letter of resignation was released with the President's reply.