Harry S. Truman
November 05, 1948

Remarks Upon Arrival at the White House.
THANK YOU very much. I can't tell you how very much I appreciate this warm and cordial welcome of the Capital City of the greatest Nation on earth. It is overwhelming. It makes a man study and wonder whether he is worthy of the confidence, worthy of the responsibility which has been thrust upon him.
I will say this to you, that I expect to work just as hard as I have done for you up to date, and to do it to the best of my ability.
I am happy to say that I will have the cooperation and help, because we have got one of the greatest Vice Presidents the country has ever had, and a great leader in the Senate and in the House. One of the great legislators of all time is the Vice President. That is one of the luckiest things a man can have when he has this tremendous job.
I shall look forward to the help and cooperation of all the people, because we are faced with great issues now, which I think we can bring to a successful conclusion. At least, we will do everything in our power to bring them to a successful conclusion.
I want to say now that I thank the turnout of the great many people here in this great Capital City. I have been in Mexico City and Rio de Janeiro, and Ottawa, Canada, nearly all the capitals of the United States, and all the great cities on this last campaign, and no turnout has been better than this one, or more enthusiastic.
I can't tell you how much I appreciate it. I thank you from the bottom of my heart.
I would like, now, to call on Mr. President of the Senate to say a few words.
Note: The President spoke at noon from the North Portico of the White House.
Senator Alben W. Barkley, the Vice President elect, responded as follows:
"Mr. President, in the language of Minnie Pearl of the 'Grand Old Opry,' I am so glad to be here. It has been a great pleasure for me to be associated with the President in this campaign, and to share with him the cordial welcome from the City of Washington and surrounding country.
"There is one thing that this election has demonstrated aside from any partisan or personal victory, and that is that the American people do their own thinking and their own voting on the day of the election.
"I shall be happy to work with the President to the extent of my ability, and to make his administration the greatest possible success, to advance the welfare of the American people--of all the American people, and to advance the cause of peace, not only at home but throughout the world.
"Now that the election is over, and the result has been decisively determined, I hope that all of our people may be united and move forward to the accomplishment of these ends.
"I thank you very much, Mr. President, and all this great crowd of people."