Harry S. Truman
November 29, 1946

Letter to Members of the National Famine Emergency Committee.
Dear__________:
I am enclosing copy of a report just received from the Secretary of Agriculture regarding the status of this year's grain export program. You will be gratified, I know, to learn the details of our relatively favorable position this year, as contrasted with the very difficult situation in which we found ourselves late last winter.
It is true that we still face a very serious transportation problem. Under present conditions this is the limiting factor on our total grain export program this year. It is a problem which calls for close administrative attention, and for full coordination with and among all transportation facilities. It is not, however, a problem which requires the sort of national campaign which your committee so successfully directed during the famine emergency. Under the circumstances, it will not be necessary for me at this time to request the Famine Emergency Committee to do more than stand by.
Let me take this opportunity to thank you personally for your service to this country and to those millions abroad whose very lives depended upon the success of our famine relief efforts. Yours was a real service for humanity. Without your efforts, and the willing cooperation of all our people who could help in any way in the famine program, the suffering abroad would have been much greater during those dread months last spring and summer when so many nations had exhausted their own food supplies. In expressing my thanks, I also express the appreciation of all those who were benefited by your efficient service.
I know that I can count upon your cooperation if developments at any time in the future make it necessary for me to call upon you again.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to President Herbert Hoover, Honorary Chairman of the Committee; Chester C. Davis, Chairman; Courtney C. Brown, Vice Chairman; James W. Young, Dr. William I. Myers, Sheldon Clark, Clarence Francis, Dr. George Gallup, Henry R. Luce, Anna Lord Strauss, Mrs. La Fell Dickinson, Justin Miller, and Eric Johnston.
Secretary Anderson's report, in the form of a 4-page letter to the President dated November 26, was also released.
The Secretary reported that record grain production in 1946 made it unlikely that further sacrifices by American consumers and industrial users would be required. He also reported the removal of limitations on the domestic distribution of flour and the relaxation of certain controls on the use of grains by brewers and distillers.