Harry S. Truman
November 15, 1947

Statement by the President Making Public the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Merchant Marine.
EARLY this year, it became apparent that the Nation was faced with the serious problem of deciding how an adequate fleet of freight and passenger vessels should be maintained. Only a few cargo vessels, and no passenger liners, were scheduled to be built in American shipyards in the immediate future, and all existing contracts for such construction were to be completed by early 1948. Many war-built vessels were ill adapted for peacetime operation, and others, though suitable for commercial trade, were rapidly growing obsolete.
This situation called for a careful examination of the present condition and the future development of our merchant fleet which traditionally has played so important a part in the Nation's well-being and security. The problem had many aspects: the nature and extent of a sound ship construction program; the maintenance of American shipbuilding skills and techniques through a program of ship replacement; the incorporation of technological developments into future vessels; the training and welfare of merchant ship officers and men; the fiscal and administrative decisions that should be made if the United States were to build and maintain a strong merchant fleet.
With these considerations in mind, last March I named an Advisory Committee on the Merchant Marine, consisting of a group of private citizens, to examine the problem of our merchant marine and to present to me its recommendations for a stable, long-range program. After several months spent in hearing the views of representatives of executive departments of the Government, the shipping and shipbuilding industries, trade and labor organizations, and others interested, and in studying pertinent statistical reports and data, the Committee has submitted its report.
The Committee concludes that a modern, efficient American merchant fleet and a progressive shipbuilding industry are indispensable to our national security, and that these are sufficiently essential to our peacetime economy, as well, to justify the Government financial aid that is necessary to maintain them. In its recommendations, the Committee sets forth a series of specific measures which in its opinion would result in a well-balanced, modern merchant fleet.
The report is being made public, in the hope that it will prove helpful not only to Members of the Congress and heads of executive agencies who have long been dealing with the problem, but also to the many private citizens who are sincerely concerned with this important phase of the Nation's security and prosperity. I am truly grateful to Mr. Keller and the other members of the Committee for the time and effort they so unselfishly expended in the preparation of this careful and thorough study.
Note: For the President's letter naming the members of the Committee, see Item 55. In the last paragraph of the statement the President referred to K. T. Keller, Committee Chairman.
The "Report of the President's Advisory Committee on the Merchant Marine" is dated November 1947 (Government Printing Office, 69 pp.).