Harry S. Truman
November 21, 1950

Memorandum Limiting the Number of Supergrade Positions in Defense Agencies.
To the heads of executive departments and agencies having responsibilities under the Defense Production Act of 1950:
I am advised by the Director, Bureau of the Budget, and the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission that requests for the allocation of positions to grades GS-16, 17 and 18 under authority of the Defense Production Act of 1950 have been out of proportion to the number of such grades heretofore authorized by the Congress for the entire Federal Service. In the interest of establishing a consistent and orderly procedure for the allocation of such grades, the following limitations are prescribed:
Effective immediately, the number of positions in the Executive Branch which may be classified in grades GS-16, 17 and 18 under the authority contained in section 710(a) of the Defense Production Act of 1950, shall be 150, of which not more than 20 shall be classified in grade GS-18.
Because of this limitation, it is essential that all agencies having responsibilities under the Defense Production Act have an equal opportunity to request the classification in grades GS-16, 17 and 18 of those positions which they believe warrant such grades. Therefore the positions which have been approved in these grades to date, but have not yet been filled and for which specific commitments to individuals have not been made, shall not be filled until they are reviewed by the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission in the light of the limitation fixed, and recertified for classification to those grades by the Chairman.
The Chairman of the Civil Service Commission will immediately advise you concerning the necessary information which shall accompany each request for recertification of classifications and for initial classification in grades GS-16, 17 and 18.
In sending you this memorandum establishing a limitation on the number of positions which can be established in the top grades under the Defense Production Act authority, it is not my intention to restrict unnecessarily the classification of positions at that level. However, it is my opinion that the authority granted the Executive Branch by the Defense Production Act provides us with flexibility which must be exercised judiciously.
I am requesting the Director of the Bereau of the Budget and the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission to report to me quarterly, beginning in January 1951, as to the effect of this limitation on the defense program and to recommend changes in this limitation whenever such action is necessary.
HARRY S. TRUMAN