Harry S. Truman
October 17, 1951

Remarks to the Members of the Supreme Council, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.
I AM most happy, as always, to receive you here. I am more than pleased to see so many visitors from our neighboring countries.
I just had a report this morning from Mr. Dodd, who is the head of the United Nations branch that is implementing the operation of what they call my point 4 program. And it is remarkable what is being done in numerous countries to inform these people on the technique of how to help themselves. And it is not a costly program, it is not a relief program.
For instance, we have a team in Ethiopia that is made up of a man from Iran, and one from Great Britain, one from here, and one from one or two other foreign countries. They were anxious to get information in Brazil on how to raise dates, and Mr. Dodd went to Iraq--to Damascus--and got two date experts and sent them down to Brazil for the information of the people down there on the best way to produce dates.
In Iran, for instance, they had a pest of insects that was eating up all their crops. We sent a couple of little hedge-hopping planes over there and ended that destruction. Very simple--very easy--cost practically nothing.
And that, I think, eventually is the real foundation of peace in the world. I think that is the way we will attain peace in the world.
If we could spend over a 10-year period just one-fourth what we will have to spend for rearming ourselves and our allies, we would accomplish the very purpose that it is necessary for us to arm for.
I thought you would probably be interested in that situation, which shows that there are a lot of other things in the world that will bring people together--just as this organization does here.
When people understand each other, they don't want to shoot each other. The human animal has about the same loves and difficulties in Guatemala as he does in the United States or in Canada.
There is one thing that I think is a shining example of how we feel toward neighbors: I don't think any of our neighbors are afraid of us. I don't think there is any fear in any of our Central American neighbors, or in Mexico, or Cuba or Canada, that we are going to do them any harm.
That is not exactly true of the neighbors of another great power in this world. And I hope maybe the time will come when that will be true, and then our troubles will be over.
I appreciate very much your coming here, and hope you have had a successful meeting, as you always have.
Note: The President spoke at 3:15 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. In the course of his remarks he referred to Norris E. Dodd, Director General, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
The Supreme Council, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, was holding its biennial session in Washington, October 15-19, 1951.