Harry S. Truman
October 09, 1948

Statement by the President Following General Marshall's Return From Paris.
GENERAL MARSHALL has returned to Washington at my request to report to me on the progress of the work of the various United Nations bodies in Paris. I had a long talk with him this morning, and again this afternoon. He gave me a detailed picture of what has been taking place in Paris, and we discussed questions relating to the future course of this Government in the various matters at issue.
With regard to the report published in this morning's press concerning a possible journey of Chief Justice Vinson to Moscow, the facts are as follows: On last Tuesday, when I communicated with Secretary Marshall, I told him of my continuing great desire to see peace firmly established in the world, and of my particular concern at this time over the attitude taken by the Soviet representatives regarding the atomic problem. I said that I was wondering whether their attitude did not reflect a misunderstanding in the minds of the Soviet leaders so serious, from the standpoint of world peace in general, that we would be remiss if we left undone anything that might conceivably serve to dispel it. I asked the Secretary whether he felt that a useful purpose would be served by sending to Moscow Chief Justice Vinson, in an effort to make the Soviet leaders understand the seriousness and sincerity of the feelings of the people of the United States about these matters. Secretary Marshall described to me the situation which we faced in Paris, and, in the light of his report and the possibilities of misunderstanding to which any unilateral action, however desirable otherwise, could lead at present, I decided not to take this step.
My talk with Secretary Marshall has been gratifying to me. I was glad to hear his report of the unity which has prevailed between ourselves and the French and British representatives in Paris in all phases of the handling of the Berlin crisis, and of the earnest efforts being made by the Security Council and the General Assembly of the United Nations to find solutions to many of the other problems which have been troubling people everywhere. I was glad to be able to assure him of the determination with which people in this country are supporting our efforts to find the road to peace.
Note: A statement by Secretary Marshall following his meeting with the President is printed in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 19, p. 483).