Harry S. Truman
October 04, 1947

Statement by the President Making Public a Report "Administration for Research."
I HAVE received today the third volume of the report on Science and Public Policy, submitted by John R. Steelman in accordance with Executive Order 9791. This volume, entitled "Administration for Research" analyzes the management of research by the Federal Government, points out key problems and recommends ways of improving the administration of the vast research and development program conducted by the Government.
I am directing the Federal departments and agencies which have important research and development functions to give careful consideration to the analysis and recommendations made in this report. The report also merits careful study by scientists outside the Government.
Note: The report, third in a series prepared by the President's Scientific Research Board, is dated October 4, 1947 (Government Printing Office, 324 pp.).
A summary was released with the President's statement
The report emphasizes the need for strengthening the administration and organization of research by Government agencies. Specific recommendations include (1) establishment of an Interdepartmental Committee on Scientific Research and Development, (2) creation of a unit in the Bureau of the Budget to review Federal scientific and research programs in relation to total Government activity, (3) designation of a member of the White House staff for scientific liaison both inside and outside the Government, and (4) establishment of a National Science Foundation.
The report further suggests that each agency establish a policy and program evaluation committee composed of its leading scientists and outside experts; that adequate staff be provided to relieve scientists of the burden of administrative detail; and that appropriation for research be provided for broad rather than specific programs and cover periods of from 3 to 5 years.
In conclusion the report makes 19 recommendations with respect to personnel problems among scientists in Government and cites the use of contracts as an outstanding development of World War II.
For other reports of the Board, see Items 183, 194, 206, 211.