Harry S. Truman
October 18, 1947

Statement by the President Making Public a Report "The Nation's Medical Research."
THE FIFTH volume of the report on Science and Public Policy by John R. Steelman, Chairman of the President's Scientific Research Board, has been transmitted to me today. This volume, "The Nation's Medical Research," deals with the promotion and extension of scientific knowledge in medicine and related fields.
The health of our people is a matter of great national importance. Yet our rich and productive Nation invests only about million annually for research in the medical sciences. This sum, which includes both public and private expenditures, amounts to less than 10 cents of each dollar spent for all types of scientific research. Mr. Steelman's report recommends that as soon as possible national expenditures should be tripled, and that the public share especially should be increased. In this expansion, Federal funds should supplement and not replace funds spent by industry and nonprofit institutions.
Another serious obstacle to obtaining a higher standard of health for all our citizens is the shortage of skilled medical investigators. In the field of medicine, as elsewhere in science, skilled manpower is in short supply. We need more trained medical scientists-not only doctors of medicine, but highly trained specialists in biology, chemistry, physics, and related fields.
Increasing research expenditures and the training of more scientists will not improve the health of our citizens unless the results of medical research are made available to them. I have previously emphasized that our national welfare demands a health program which will bring medical care within the reach of all of our people. Only a national health insurance system will meet that need. Such a system together with an expanded and well balanced research program, and an increased supply of medical scientists and doctors will strengthen our Nation and reduce unnecessary human suffering.
Publication of "The Nation's Medical Research," which is the fifth and final volume of Mr. Steelman's report on Science and Public Policy marks the completion of the tasks assigned to the Chairman and members of the President's Scientific Research Board, established by Executive Order 9791. The full report is a comprehensive and farsighted attack upon the complex problems of the Nation's scientific research. It deserves thoughtful study by all who are concerned with the role of science in the development and security of our Nation.
Note: The 118-page report, dated October 18, was published by the Government Printing Office.
For other reports of the President's Scientific Research Board, see Items 183, 194, 201, 206.