Harry S. Truman
October 12, 1949

Remarks at a Meeting With the Ambassadors to the Council of the Organization of American States.
Gentlemen of the Council of American States:
Columbus Day provides a fitting opportunity for me to meet in a friendly and informal way with my distinguished neighbors, the Ambassadors on the Council of the Organization of American States. This Organization is an outstanding example of effective international cooperation. The United States Government supports it wholeheartedly. The success of the inter-American system should encourage the peoples of other parts of the world to persevere in their efforts to solve common problems by mutual trust and helpfulness.
We have demonstrated how much can be accomplished when nations temper their national aspirations with concern for the interests of all. This is evident in the work of the American Republics for economic and social development. With increasing emphasis, we are striving to make possible a better life not only for the people of today but for generations still unborn. Our desire for security, in fact, is not primarily in order that our lives may remain unchanged, but that we may progressively realize our vast possibilities.
It is this spirit which motivates the growing exchange of technical knowledge and skill that has been taking place among our countries. We look forward to an even more vigorous technical cooperation through all available channels, including the United Nations and its specialized agencies. We intend increasingly to help one another in the efforts of each to help himself.
We look to the Organization of American States for support of programs to raise living standards and to foster balanced economic development throughout the hemisphere. And since material improvement would be sterile and useless without the cultural and intellectual growth, we should make every effort to intensify cultural and intellectual cooperation.
The Organization has a great responsibility for strengthening the peace and security of the Americas and for inducing governments to respect their freely accepted international obligations. In the inter-American system we subscribe fully to the principle of nonintervention in the affairs of any American republic. At the same time, we are definitely committed to the proposition that our solidarity and high aims are fostered by the exercise of representative democracy in the American States. I am confident that you will continue to provide inspiring leadership toward the achievement of these aims.
As for this Government, Secretary Acheson stated recently before the Pan American, Society in New York that the good-neighbor policy is for us a firmly established national policy. I fully support the principles and objectives outlined by him on that occasion.
The United States is honored and happy to be the host country of the Organization of American States. We want you to feel most welcome and entirely at home among us as you continue your invaluable work in behalf of all the peoples of the American Republics.
Note: The President spoke in his office at the White House at 12 noon.