Harry S. Truman
September 25, 1945

Letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives Transmitting Proposed Reductions in Appropriations for the War Department.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives:
Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith for the consideration of the Congress (1) proposed rescissions of portions of appropriations for the Military Establishment available for the fiscal year 1946, amounting to $28,692,772,000, and (2) a proposed provision authorizing certain transfers of appropriated funds.
I plan a continuing review of appropriations for the Military Establishment and will recommend such further adjustments as conditions warrant.
The details of these proposed rescissions and the proposed provision pertaining to existing appropriations are set forth in the letter of the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, transmitted herewith, in whose comments and observations thereon I concur.

Respectfully yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
Note: A White House release describing the President's proposal pointed out that, in addition to the recommended rescissions amounting to $28.7 billion, another half billion dollars would be returned to the Treasury by the War Department from funds available in special replacing accounts. The release also stated that the recommended reductions reflected savings due to the decrease in the strength of the Army and reduced requirements for supplies and equipment made possible by the surrender of Japan. The release further stated that it was contemplated that the Army would be reduced to a strength of 1,950,000 by June 30, 1946. It added that allowances had been made for an adequate research program, limited procurement of 'newly developed weapons of warfare, and for continued production on a reduced scale of advanced types of aircraft.
The details of the proposal as set forth in the letter of the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, transmitted with the President's letter, are printed in House Document 290 (79th Cong., 1st sess,).