Harry S. Truman
September 04, 1951

Telegram to the Attorney General Authorizing Him To Issue an Injunction in the Copper Industry Strike.
My dear Mr. Attorney General:
On August 30, 1951, by virtue of the authority vested in me by Section 206 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (Public Law 101, 80th Congress), I issued Executive Order No. 10283, creating a Board of Inquiry to inquire into the issues involved in labor disputes between Kennecott Copper Corporation, Phelps Dodge Corporation, American Smelting and Refining Company, Anaconda Copper Mining Company, including International Smelting and Refining Company, and other employers who are similarly engaged in mining, milling, smelting, or refining copper or other non-ferrous metals and certain of their employees represented by certain labor organizations, including the International Union of Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers, several railroad brotherhoods, and unions affiliated with the American Federation of Labor.
On September 4, 1951, I received the Board's written report in the matter. A copy of that report is attached hereto. The report indicates that certain of the disputes have been settled, but that others covering a substantial part of the industry are still unresolved.
In my opinion, these unresolved labor disputes have resulted in strikes or lock-outs affecting a substantial part of an industry engaged in trade and commerce among the several States and with foreign nations, and in the production of goods for commerce, which strikes or lock-outs, if permitted to continue, will imperil the national health and safety.
I therefore direct you, pursuant to the provisions of Section 208 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947, to petition in the name of the United States any District Court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties to enjoin the continuance of such strikes or lock-outs where such action is necessary to secure a resumption of production in the industry, and for such relief as may in your judgment be necessary or appropriate.

Very sincerely yours,
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[Honorable J. Howard McGrath, The Attorney General, Washington, D.C.]
Note: For the background of the strike in the copper and other nonferrous metals industry, together with citations to the reports and other documents relating to the settlement, see Item 204.
The text of the President's telegram of September 4 was released in San Francisco.