Harry S. Truman
September 29, 1950

Message Congratulating General MacArthur on the Liberation of Seoul.
I KNOW that I speak for the entire American people when I send you my warmest congratulations on the victory which has been achieved under your leadership in Korea. Few operations in military history can match either the delaying action where you traded space for time in which to build up your forces, or the brilliant maneuver which has now resulted in the liberation of Seoul. I am particularly impressed by the splendid cooperation of our Army, Navy and Air Force, and I wish you would extend my thanks and congratulations to the commanders of those services--Lieutenant General Walton H. Walker, Vice Admiral Charles T. Joy and Lieutenant General George E. Stratemeyer. The unification of our arms established by you and by them has set a shining example. My thanks and the thanks of the people of all the free nations go out to your gallant forces--soldiers, sailors, marines and air men from the United States and the other countries fighting for freedom under the United Nations banner. I salute you all, and say to all of you from all of us at home, "Well and nobly done."
HARRY S. TRUMAN
[General Douglas MacArthur, Tokyo, Japan]
Note: On September 30 the White House released the following reply from General MacArthur, dated September 30:
President Harry S. Truman:
I am most grateful for your generous message which I shall transmit to the elements of this command. It will be a source of inspiration and strength to all concerned.
DOUGLAS MACARTHUR
On October 6 the White House released the following message from the Honorable Syngman Rhee, President of the Republic of Korea, dated September 30:
President Harry & Truman:
Please accept for yourself personally and, through you, for all the American people and United States Forces fighting in and near Korea, the deep gratitude of the Korean people for United States decisions and actions which now have led to the liberation of Seoul. The Korean people will always cherish the memory of your bold leadership in defense of liberty.
SYNGMAN RHEE