Harry S. Truman
September 30, 1950

Remarks Upon Awarding the Congressional Medal of Honor to Maj. Gen. William F. Dean
THE CITATION on which I have awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor to Maj. Gen. William F. Dean is an inadequate description of the gallant acts of that distinguished officer. These acts, so inspiring to those of us here on the home front, were of almost incalculable value on the battlefield. They substantially contributed to the surge of heroism and devotion which swept through the ranks of the embattled Infantrymen of those early days in Korea and enabled them to make their magnificent stand against the overwhelming forces opposing them.
Once again in our history, despite all the wonders of modern science and the massive weight of the world's industrial production, victory has been gained because the man standing on the ground, sleeping in the mud and fighting face to face with a ruthless and determined foe would not give up.
In the beginning many of these soldiers fighting on the ground were little more than boys bewildered by the whirlwind of events into which necessity hurled them. But these boys became men, stood their ground and fought in a tradition of stubborn determination for which every American can feel a deep and abiding pride. Disputing every hill and rice paddy, they made it possible for us to muster and transport the strength which has defeated the forces of aggression.
Many of them lie buried in Korea. Many more have been wounded and many whose fate is still not known, are missing in action. The free peoples of the world, and those enslaved peoples who dream of freedom, give honor to these men. To those who sacrificed their lives, they erect in their hearts a monument which time cannot efface--an enduring faith in the deeds of men who are making possible a free and peaceful world.
As President of the United States, I am privileged to voice this tribute of my profound respect and admiration for valor above and beyond the call of duty which characterized the spirit of our soldiers in those bitter early weeks of the Korean conflict. I am confident that my words reflect the feeling in the hearts of all Americans.
Note: The President presented the award to Mrs. William F. Dean in a ceremony at the White House. General Dean's son and daughter, Cadet William F. Dean and Mrs. Robert C. Williams, attended the ceremony.
The citation follows:
"The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, March 3, 1863, has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
MAJOR GENERAL WILLIAM F. DEAN, USA
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty in action with the enemy:
"General Dean, Commanding General, 24th Infantry Division, distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the repeated risk of his life, above and beyond the call of duty in Taejon, Korea, on 20 and 21 July 1950. In command of a unit suddenly relieved from occupation duties in Japan and as yet untried in combat; faced with a ruthless and determined enemy, highly trained and overwhelmingly superior in numbers; he felt it his duty to take action which to a man of his military experience and knowledge was clearly apt to result in his death. He personally and alone attacked an enemy tank while armed only with a hand grenade. He also directed the fire of his own tanks from an exposed position with neither cover nor concealment while, under observed artillery and small arms fire. When the town of Taejon was finally overrun he refused to insure his own safety by leaving with the leading elements but remained behind organizing his retreating forces, directing stragglers, and was last seen assisting the wounded to a place of safety. These actions indicate that General Dean felt it necessary to sustain the courage and resolution of his troops by examples of excessive gallantry committed always at the threatened portions of his front lines. The magnificent response of his unit to this willing and cheerful sacrifice, made with full knowledge of its certain cost, is history. The success of this phase of the campaign is in large measure due to General Dean's heroic leadership, courageous and loyal devotion to his men, and his complete disregard for personal safety.
"HARRY S. TRUMAN"
On September 4, 1953, General Dean was repatriated at Panmunjom, Korea. He was the highest ranking United Nations prisoner of war taken by the Communist forces during the Korean military action.