Harry S. Truman
September 27, 1950

Recorded Address for Broadcast on Democratic Women' s Day.
Today is being celebrated as Women's Day by the Democratic Party. And I want to talk to you about something that is of great importance to women--not only those who belong to the Democratic Party, but to all the women in the country.
This is an election year. On November 7, not quite 6 weeks from today, we will elect a new Congress. We have to vote on all the Members of the House of Representatives and one-third of the Members of the Senate.
I wish I could impress upon the women of the country, and upon the men as well, just how essential it is to go to the polls and vote on election day. I remember that in 1946 only a little over one-third of the eligible voters cast their ballots in the congressional elections. In 1948 we did better, but even then only about half of those who were eligible voted.
This indicates that many people do not appreciate how important it is to have the right kind of government. I hear of many cases where men fail to vote because they would lose time from their jobs. I know that it is frequently difficult for women to get away from their homes to go to the polls.
But the future of your jobs and your homes depends on the kind of government you have. Having the right kind of people in 'public office is worth much more, in terms of your own future welfare, than any time or trouble involved in getting out to vote.
This is particularly true in this year of 1950.
Today the United States occupies a position of leadership among the free nations. We have a great responsibility to use our strength to bring about a just and lasting peace. During the next few years we will be passing through a very critical period.
The Congress you vote for on November 7 will have much to do with whether we are to achieve our goal of peace or be plunged into another war. In that Congress, there should be no room for men or women who put partisan advantage above their country's welfare.
I am deeply aware of the concern that women feel over the danger of Communist aggression. I know the anxiety you feel for the future of your families. I know that you are eager to take your places in the defense effort, wherever you can--in industry, or in the armed services, or through volunteer activity in your home communities. I know you want to contribute in every way you can to meeting the crisis that confronts us. One of the greatest contributions you can make is to study the issues of this campaign, and to vote wisely in November.
Do all you can to make sure that the candidates you vote for on election day will help to win the peace. Do all you can to make sure that they will help to keep America strong and free. Do all you can to make sure that they will help our country cooperate with other free nations. Above all, be sure that the candidates you vote for are not the kind of people who will try to divide us over petty issues or weaken our international position for purely partisan reasons.
Women will bear a great share of the responsibility for the kind of Congress we elect. Indeed, since there are more women voters than there are men voters, yours is the greater share of the responsibility.
I hope you will look carefully and wisely at the issues and the candidates before you, and will cast your ballots to strengthen this country in its struggle to achieve peace and freedom.
Note: The address was prerecorded for release at 3:25 p.m.