Harry S. Truman
September 25, 1951

Executive Order 10292—Amending the Selective Service Regulations
By virtue of the authority vested in me by title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act (62 Stat. 604), as amended, I hereby prescribe the following amendments of the Selective Service Regulations prescribed by Executive Orders No. 9979 of July 20, 1948, No. 9988 of August 20, 1948, No. 9992 of August 28, 1948, No. 10001 of September 17, 1948, No. 10008 of October 18, 1948, No. 10116 of March 9, 1950, No. 10167 of October 11, 1950, No. 10202 of January 12, 1951, No. 10230 of March 31, 1951, and No. 10232 of April 18, 1951, and constituting portions of Chapter XVI of Title 32 of the Code of Federal Regulations:

1.a. Section 1602.1 of Part 1602, Definitions, is amended to read as follows:

§ 1602.1 Definitions to govern. The definitions contained in section 16 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and the definitions contained in this part shall govern in the interpretation of the regulations in this chapter.

Section 1602.5 of Part 1602 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1602.5 Governor. The word "Governor" includes, where applicable, the Governor of each of the States of the United States, the Governor of the Territory of Alaska, the Governor of the Territory of Hawaii, the Board of Commissioners of the District of Columbia, the Governor of Puerto Rico, the Governor of the Virgin Islands of the United States, the Governor of Guam, and the Governor of the Canal Zone.

Section 1602.10 of Part 1602 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1602.10 Selective service law. The term "selective service law" includes title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and all rules and regulations issued thereunder.

d. Section 1602.13 of Part 1602 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1602.13 Special registrant. Except as otherwise specifically provided, a "special registrant" is a person in a medical, dental, or allied specialist category registered under section 4(1) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended.

2.a. Paragraphs (b) and (d) of § 1604.6 of Part 1604, Selective Service Officers, are amended to read as follows:

(b) The National Board is authorized and directed to perform all the functions and duties vested in the President by that sentence of section 10(b)(3) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, which reads as follows: "The President, upon appeal or upon his own motion, shall have power to determine all claims or questions with respect to inclusion for, or exemption or deferment from training and service under this title, and the determination of the President shall be final"
* * * * *
(d) The Director of Selective Service and the National Board shall each furnish to the other such information and assistance as will further the attainment of the objectives of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and promote the effective administration of such title. The Director of Selective Service shall provide for the payment of the compensation and expenses of the members of the National Board and shall furnish the National Board suitable office space and other necessary facilities and services at the National Selective Service Headquarters.

b. Section 1604.13 of Part 1604 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1604.13 State Director of Selective Service for New York City. The Governor of the State of New York is authorized to recommend a person to be appointed by the President as State Director of Selective Service for New York City, who shall represent the Governor in all selective service matters within the City of New York. Subject to the direction and control of the Director of Selective Service, the State Director of Selective Service for New York City shall be in immediate charge of the State Headquarters for Selective Service for New York City and shall be responsible for carrying out the functions of the Selective Service System within the City of New York. The State Director of Selective Service for the State of New York shall have no jurisdiction in selective service matters within the City of New York. The State Headquarters for Selective Service for New York City shall be an office of record for selective service operations only, and no records other than selective service records shall be maintained in such office.

c. Section 1604.21 of Part 1604 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1604.21 Area. In the Territory of Alaska, the Canal Zone, the District of Columbia, Guam, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of the United States, the State of Idaho, the State of Montana, the State of Wyoming, and each State of the United States constituting one Federal judicial district, each State Director of Selective Service shall establish one appeal board area which shall comprise the entire State, Territory, or possession. In each State which is divided into two or more Federal judicial districts, except the State of New York and the City of New York, each State Director of Selective Service shall establish for each such district an appeal board area which shall comprise the entire district. The State Director of Selective Service for the State of New York

shall establish for each Federal Judicial district or portion thereof in that State located outside of the City of New York an appeal board area which shall comprise the entire district or portion thereof. The State Director of Selective Service for New York City shall establish for each of the Federal judicial districts located partly within the City of New York an appeal board area which shall comprise the entire portion of such district located within the City of New York.

d. Section 1604.51 of Part 1604 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1604.51 Areas. The State Director of Selective Service for each State shall divide his State into local board areas. Normally, no such area should have a population exceeding 100,000. There shall be at least one separate local board area in each county; provided, that an intercounty local board may be established for an area not exceeding five counties within a State when the Director of Selective Service determines, after considering the public interest involved and the recommendation of the Governor, that the establishment of such local board area will result in a more efficient and economical operation. Each local board area shall be entirely within one appeal board area.

3. Part 1611, Duty and responsibility to register, is amended to read as follows:
PART 1611-DUTY AND RESPONSIBILITY TO REGISTER

Sec.

1611.1 Persons required to be registered.

1611.2 Persons not required to be registered.

1611.3 Change of status.

1611.4 Registration of male persons separated from armed forces.

1611.5 Registration of certain persons entering the United States.

1611.6 Inmate of institutions

1611.7 Responsibility for performance of duty.

§ 1611.1 Persons required to be registered. (a) Except as otherwise provided by the regulations in this part, it shall be the duty of every male citizen of the United States, and every other male person who is in or hereafter enters the United States, who shall have attained the eighteenth anniversary of the day of his birth and who shall have not attained the twenty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth on the day or any of the days fixed for registration by Presidential proclamation to present himself for and submit to registration under the provisions of section 3 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, at such time or times and place of places, and in such manner as is required by proclamation of the President and the regulations in this part.

(b) Every male person required to register shall present himself for and submit to registration before a duly designated registration official or the local board having jurisdiction in the area in which he has his permanent home or in which he may happen to be on the day or any of the days fixed for his registration.

§1611.2 Persons not required to be registered. (a) Under the provisions of section 6(a) of Title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the following persons are not required to be registered:

(1) Commissioned officers, warrant officers, pay clerks, enlisted men, and aviation cadets of the Regular Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the Public Health Service;

(2) Cadets, United States Military Academy;

(3) Midshipmen, United States Navy;

(4) Cadets, United States Coast Guard Academy;

(5) Midshipmen, Merchant Marine Reserve, United States Naval Reserves;

(6) Students enrolled in an officer procurement program at military colleges the curriculum of which is approved by the Secretary of Defense;

(7) Members of the reserve components of the Armed Forces, the Coast Guard, and the Public Health Service, while on active duty; and

(8) Foreign diplomatic representatives, technical attachés of foreign embassies and legations, consults general, consults, vice consuls and other consular agents of foreign countries who are not citizens of the United States, and members of their families.

(b) A male alien who is now in or who hereafter enters the United States and who has not been admitted for permanent residence in the United States shall not be required to be registered under section 3 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and shall be relieved from liability for training and service under section 4 of said Act, provided:

(1) He is a full-time official or employee of a foreign government who has been notified to the Department of State, or a member of the family of such official or employee;

(2) He is a full-time official or employee of a public international organization which has been designated by the President under the provisions of the International Organizations Immunities Act, approved December 29, 1945 (59 Stat. 669), or a member of the family of such person;

(3) He is a person who has entered the United States and remains therein pursuant to the provisions of section 11 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America Regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations as approved in Public Law 357.80th Congress, approved August 4, 1947 (61 Stat.756);

(4) He is a member of a group of persons who have been temporarily admitted to the United States under an arrangement with the government of the country of which they are nationals, or an appropriate agency thereof, for seasonal or temporary employment, and continues to be employed in the work for which he was admitted;

(5) He is a person who has entered the United States temporarily as a nonquota immigrant under the provisions of subdivision (e) of section 4 of the Immigration Act approved May 26, 1924, as amended (43 Stat. 155; 8 U.S.C. 204(e)), solely for the purpose of study at an accredited school, college, academy, seminary, or university, particularly designated by him and approved by the Attorney General, and continues to pursue such purpose to the satisfaction of the Attorney General; or

(6) He is a person who has entered the United States temporarily pursuant to the provisions of section 201 of the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 (62 Stat. 7; 22 U.S.C. 1446; Public Law 402, 80th Congress), and continues to pursue the purpose for which he was admitted.

(c) Each alien who is in the category described in subparagraph (8) of paragraph (a) of this section or who is in one of the categories described in subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of paragraph (b) of this section must have in his personal possession, at all times, an official document issued pursuant to the authorization of or described by the Director of Selective Service which identifies him as a person not required to present himself for and submit to registration.

(d) Each alien who is in the category described in subparagraph (5) of paragraph (b) of this section must have in his possession and available for examination his passport containing a visa issued by a diplomatic or consular officer of the United States pursuant to the provisions of subdivision (e) of section 4 of the Immigration Act approved May 26, 1924, as amended (43 Stat. 155; 8 U.S.C. 204(e)).

(e) Each alien who is in the category described in subparagraph (6) of paragraph (b) of this section must have in his possession and available for examination his passport containing a visa issued by a diplomatic or consular officer of the United States pursuant to the provisions of clause (2) of section 3 of the Immigration Act approved May 26, 1924, as amended (43 Stat. 154; 8 U.S.C. 203 (2)) in which visa, on the line provided in the visa form for classification, there appear the words "Sec. 201, P.L. 402, 80th Cong.".

§ 1611.3 Change of status. Except as otherwise provided by the regulations in this part, every male person who would have been required to be registered on a day or one of the days fixed by Presidential proclamation except for the fact that he was in one of the categories described in § 1611.2 shall present himself for and submit to registration before a local board when a change in his status removes him from such category.

§ 1611.4 Registration of male persons separated from armed forces. Every male person who (a) has been separated from active service in the armed forces, the Coast and Geodetic Survey or the Public Health Service, (b) has not been registered prior to such separation, and (c) would have been required to be registered except for the fact that he was in such active service on the day or days fixed for his registration by Presidential proclamation, shall present himself for and submit to registration before a local board within the period of 30 days following the date on which he was so separated.

§ 1611.5 Registration of certain persons entering the United States. (a) Every male citizen of the United States who would have been required to register on any day or days fixed for registration by Presidential proclamation had he been within the United States and who thereafter enters the United States shall present himself for and submit to registration before a local board within the period of five days following the date on which he enters the United States.

(b) Every male person, other than a citizen of the United States and a person excepted from registration by § 1611.2 of this part, who enters the United States subsequent to the day or days fixed by Presidential proclamation for the registration of a person of his age shall present himself for and submit to registration before a local board within the period of six months following the date on which he enters the United States

§ 1611.6 Inmate of institution. Unless he has already been registered, every person subject to registration who is an inmate of an insane asylum, jail, penitentiary, reformatory, or similar institution shall be registered on the day he leaves the institution.

§ 1611.7 Responsibility for performance of duty. (a) Every person subject to registration is required to familiarize himself with the rules and regulations governing registration and to comply therewith.

(b) Every person who, on the day or one of the days fixed for registration, is required to be registered is personally charged with the duty of presenting himself before the proper officials and submitting to the registration.

(c) The duty of every person subject to registration to present himself for and submit to registration shall continue at all times, and if for any reason any such person is not registered on the day or one of the days fixed for his registration, he shall immediately present himself for and submit to registration before the local board in the area where he happens to be.

(d) Persons required to present themselves for and submit to registration shall not be paid for performing such obligation nor shall they be paid travel allowances or expenses.

4. a. Section 1621.1 of Part 1621, Preparation for classification, is revoked.

b. Section 1621.9 of Part 1621 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1621.9 Mailing Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100), (a) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, the local board shall mail a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) to each registrant to whom it has not previously mailed such questionnaire in strict accordance with the dates of birth of the registrants of the local board, in chronological order, commencing with the registrant having the earliest date of birth. When a late registrant registers after his date of birth has been reached in the mailing of Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No 100), or when the Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) of a registrant is received late and after such date has been so reached, a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) shall be mailed immediately to such registrant and he shall thereafter be considered in the sequence of liability in which he would have been considered had he registered, or his Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) been received on time. The Classification Questionnaires (SSS Form No. 100) shall be mailed as rapidly as possible, consistent with the ability of the local board to give them prompt consideration upon their return..

(b) Before a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) is mailed, it shall be prepared by filling in all blanks on page 1.

(c) The date upon which the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) is mailed shall be entered on the Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101) and on the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102).

(d) If the local board determines from information available to it and to its full and complete satisfaction that a registrant may be classified properly without such form, the local board need not mail a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) to a registrant who registers after a separation from active service in the Armed Forces of the United States, but in each such case the local board shall place in the registrant's Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101) a memorandum of the information upon which the determination was based.

c. Section 1621.16b of Part 1621 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1621.16 Permit to leave the United States. Local boards are authorized to issue to a registrant a permit to depart from the continental United States, the Territory of Alaska, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of the United States, Guam, or the Canal Zone to any place which is not within any of those areas, and should issue the permit unless it is found that the registrant's absence is likely to interfere with the performance of his obligations under title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended. Such permit shall be issued by the completion of a Permit of the Local Board for Registrant to Depart from the United States (SSS Form No. 300). Before determining whether a permit should be issued, the local board may require the registrant to complete and file his Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and such other forms and information as may be necessary to complete his classification. The local board may thereupon classify the registrant if it appears necessary to a determination of the advisability of issuing the permit.

5. Part 1622, Classification Rules and Principles, is amended to read as follows:

PART 1622 - CLASSIFICATION RULES AND PRINCIPLES

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Sec.

1622.1 General principles of classification

1622.2 Classes.
CLASS I

1622.10 Class I-A: Available for military service

1622.11 Class I-A-O: Conscientious objector available for noncombatant military service only.

1622.12 Class I-C: Member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Coast and Geodetic Survey or the Public Health Service, and certain registrants separated therefrom

1622.13 Class I-D: Member of reserve component or student taking military training.

1622.14 Class I-O: Conscientious objector available for civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest.

1622.15 Class I-S: Student deferred by statue

1622.16 Class I-W: Conscientious objector performing civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest.
CLASS II

1622.20 General rules for classification in Class II.

1622.21 Length of deferments in Class II.

1622.22 Class II-A: Registrant deferred because of civilian occupation (except agriculture and activity in study)

1622.23 Necessary employment defined.

1622.24 Class II-C: Registrant deferred because of agricultural occupation.

1622.25 Class II-S: Registrant deferred because of activity in study.
CLASS III

1622.30 Class III-A: Registrant with a child or children; and registrant deferred by reason of extreme hardship and privation to dependents.

CLASS IV

1622.40 Class IV-A: Registrant who has completed service; sole surviving son.

1622.41 Class IV-B: Officials deferred by law.

1622.42 Class IV-C: Aliens.

1622.43 Class IV-D: Minister of religion or divinity student.

1622.44 Class IV-F: Physically, mentally, or morally unfit.
CLASS V

1622.50 Class V-A: Registrant over the age of liability for military service.

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

1622.60 Director may direct that eligibility for particular classification be disregarded.

1622.61 Identifying a registrant whose registration is cancelled.

1622.62 Identifying a registrant whose induction is postponed.

1622.63 Identifying registrants who are deceased.

1622.64 Identification of Class I-C registrant se0arated from armed forces

1622.65 Identification of Class I-C registrant transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

§1622.1 General principles of classification. (a) The Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, provides that every male citizen of the United States, every other male person admitted to the United States for permanent residence, and every other male person who has remained in the United States in a status other than that of permanent resident for a period exceeding one year, who is between the ages of 18 years and 6 months and 26 years, shall be liable for training and service in the Armed Forces of the United States, and that persons who on June 19, 1951, were, or thereafter are, deferred under the provisions of section 6 of such act shall remain liable for training and service until they attain the age of 35. Certain exemptions and deferments are specifically provided; others are authorized to be provided by regulations promulgated by the President.

(b) Classification is the key to selection and it must be accomplished in the spirit of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, in which the Congress has declared "that in a free society the obligations and privileges of serving in the armed forces and the reserve components thereof should be shared generally, in accordance with a system of selection which is fair and just, and which is consistent with the maintenance of an effective national economy."

(c) It is the local board's responsibility to decide, subject to appeal, the class in which each registrant shall be placed. Each registrant will be considered as available for military service until his eligibility for deferment or exemption from military service is clearly established to the satisfaction of the local board. The local board will receive and consider all information, pertinent to the classification of a registrant, presented to it. The mailing by the local board of a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) to the latest address furnished by a registrant shall be notice to the registrant that unless information is presented to the local board, within the time specified for the return of the questionnaire, which will justify his deferment or exemption from military service the registrant will be classified in Class I-A.

(d) In classifying a registrant there shall be no discrimination for or against him because of his race, creed, or color, or because of his membership or activity in any labor, political, religious, or other organization. Each such registrant shall receive equal justice.
§1622.2 Classes. Each registrant shall be classified in one of the following classes:

CLASS I

Class I-A: Available for military service

Class I-A-O: Conscientious objector available for noncombatant military service only.

Class I-C: Member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Coast and Geodetic Survey or the Public Health Service, and certain registrants separated

therefrom.

Class I-D: Member of reserve component or student taking military training.

Class I-O: Conscientious objector available for civilian work contributing to the

maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest.

Class I-S: Student deferred by statue.

Class I-W: Conscientious objector performing civilian work contributing to he maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest.
CLASS II

Class II-A: Registrant deferred because of civilian occupation (except agriculture and activity in study).

Class II-C: Registrant deferred because of agricultural occupation.

Class II-S: Registrant deferred because of activity in study.
CLASS III

Class III-A: Registrant with a child or children; and registrant deferred by reason of extreme hardship and privation to dependents.

CLASS IV

Class IV-A: Registrant who has completed service; sole surviving son.

Class IV-B: Officials deferred by law.

Class IV-C: Aliens

Class IV-D: Minister of religion or divinity student.

Class IV-F: Physically, mentally, or morally unfit.
CLASS V

Class V-A: Registrant over the age of liability for military service.

CLASS I

§ 1622.10 Class I-A: Available for military service. In Class I-A shall be placed every registrant who has failed to establish to the satisfaction of the local board, subject to appeal hereinafter provided, that he is eligible for classification in another class.

§ 1622.11 Class I-A-O: Conscientious objector available for noncombatant military service only. (a) In Class I_A_O shall be placed every registrant who would have been classified in Class I-A but for the fact that he has bee found, by reason of religious training and belief, to be conscientiously opposed to combatant training and service in the armed forces.

(b) Section 6(j) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, provides in part as follows:

Religious training and belief in this connection means an individual's belief in a relation to a Supreme Being involving duties superior to those arising from any human relation, but does not include essentially political, sociological, or philosophical views or a merely personal moral code.

§ 1622.12 Class I-C: Member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Coast and Geodetic Survey or the Public Health Service, and certain registrants separated therefrom. In Class I-C shall be placed:

(a) Every registrant who is, or who by enlistment, or appointment becomes a commissioned officer a warrant officer, a pay clerk, an enlisted man or an aviation cadet of the Regular Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the Coast and Geodetic Survey or the Public Health Service.

(b) Every registrant who is a cadet, United States Military Academy; or a midshipman, United States Navy; or a cadet, United States Coast Guard Academy; or a midshipman, Merchant Marine Reserve, United States Naval Reserves.

(c) Every registrant who by induction becomes a member of the Army of the United States, the United States Navy, the United States Marine Corps, the Air Force of the United States, or the United States Coast Guard.

(d) Every registrant who is a member of a reserve component of the armed forces or the Public Health Service and who is on active duty (exclusive of periods for training only).

(e) Every registrant who has been inducted into the armed forces under the provisions of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and who (1) has been separated therefrom by honorable discharge or discharge under honorable conditions, or by an equivalent type of release from service, except when such discharge or release was because of erroneous induction or when the branch of the armed forces concerned certifies that such discharge or release was accomplished upon the application of the registrant and was based upon inadequate evidence of his status, or (2) has been transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces. Each such registrant who has been transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces shall be identified with the abbreviation "Res." In the manner provided in § 1622.65, and every other such registrant shall be identified with the abbreviation "Disc." In the manner provided in § 1622.64, and upon attaining an age beyond the maximum age of liability for military service under the provisions of the selective service law, all such registrants shall be reclassified in Class V-A.

(f) Every registrant who, on or after June 24, 1948, has entered upon active duty in the armed forces, other than active duty for training only, and (1) who has been separated therefrom by honorable discharge or discharge under honorable conditions or by an equivalent type of release from service, except when such discharge or release was because of minority or fraudulent enlistment or when the branch of the armed forces concerned certifies that such discharge or release was accomplished upon the application of the registrant and was based upon inadequate evidence of his status, or (2) who has been separated therefrom by honorable discharge or discharge under honorable conditions or by an equivalent type of release from service and transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces or (3) who has been transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces. Each such registration who has been transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces shall be identified with the abbreviation "Res." In the manner provided in § 1622.65, and every other such registrant shall be identified with the abbreviation "Disc." In the manner provided in § 1622.64, and upon attaining an age beyond the maximum age of liability for military service under the provisions of the selective service law, all such registrants shall be reclassified in Class V-A.
§ 1622.13 Class I-D: Member of reserve component or student taking military training.

(a) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who served honorably on active duty between September 16, 1940 and June 24, 1948, for a period of 90 days or more but less than 12 months in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the Public Health Service, or the armed forces of any country allied with the United States in World War II prior to September 2, 1945, when such period of active duty does not include a period in excess of 90 days between December 7, 1941, and September 2, 1945, if-
(1) The local board determines that he is regularly enlisted or commissioned in any organized unit of a reserve component of the armed force in which he served, provided such unit is reasonably accessible to such person without unduly interrupting his normal pursuits and activities (including attendance at a college or university in which he is regularly enrolled), or in a reserve component (other than in an organized unit) of such armed force in any case in which enlistment or commission in an organized unit of a reserve component of such armed force is not available to him; or

(2) The local board determines that enlistment or commission in a reserve component of such armed force is not available to him or that he has voluntarily enlisted or accepted appointment in an organized unit of a reserve component of an armed force other than the armed force in which he served.
(b) For the purposes of computation of the periods of active duty referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, no credits shall be allowed for-
(1) Periods or active duty training performed as a member of a reserve component pursuant to an order or call to active duty solely for training purposes.

(2) Periods of active duty in which the service consisted solely of training under the Army specialized training program, the Army Air Force college training program, or any similar program under the jurisdiction of the Navy, Marine Corps or Coast Guard;

(3) Periods of active duty as a cadet at the United States Military Academy or United States Coast Guard Academy, or as a midshipman at the United States Naval Academy, or in a preparatory school after nomination as a principal, alternate, or candidate for admission to any such academies; or

(4) Periods of active duty in any of the armed forces while being processed for entry into or separation from any educational program or institution referred to in subparagraphs (2) or (3) of this paragraph.
(c) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who on February 1, 1951, was a member of an organized unit of the federally recognized National Guard, the "federally recognized Air National Guard, the Officers' Reserve Corps, the Regular Army Reserve, the Air Force Reserve, the Enlisted Reserve Corps, the Naval Reserve, the Marine Corps Reserve, the Coast Guard Reserve, or the Public Health Service Reserve, so long as he continues to be such member and satisfactorily participates in scheduled drills and training periods as prescribed by the Secretary of Defense.

(d) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who prior to attaining the age of 18 years and 6 months, and prior to the determination by the of Defense that adequate trained personnel are available to the National Guard to enable it to maintain its strength authorized by current appropriations enlisted or accepted appointment in any organized unit of the National Guard in any case in which the Governor of the State has determined and has issued a proclamation to the effect that the organized strength of such organized unit of the National Guard of his State cannot be maintained by enlistment or appointment of persons referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, or persons who are not liable for training and service under title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended. Such registrant shall be retained in Class I-D so long as he continues to serve satisfactorily as a member of such organized unit.

(e) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who (1) has been selected for enrollment or continuance in the senior division, Reserve Officers' Training Corps, or the Air Reserve Officers' Training Corps, or the Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps, or the Naval and Marine Corps officer candidate training program, or the Reserve officers' candidate program of the Navy, or the platoon leaders' class of the Marine Corps, or the officer procurement programs of the Coast Guard and the Coast Guard Reserve, or is appointed an ensign, United States Naval Reserve, while undergoing professional training; (2) has agreed, in writing, to accept a commission, if tendered, and to serve, subject to order of the Secretary of the military department having jurisdiction over him (or the Secretary of the Treasury with respect to the United States Coast Guard), not less than two years on active duty after receipt of a commission; and (3) has agreed to remain a member of a regular or reserve component until the eighth anniversary of the receipt of a commission in accordance with his obligation under section 4(d) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended. Such registrant shall be retained in Class I-D until after completion or termination of the course of instruction and so long as he continues in a regular or reserve status upon being commissioned.

(f) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who (1) was an enlisted member of a reserve component of the armed forces on June 25, 1950, and thereafter has continued to serve satisfactorily in such reserve component, and (2) has applied for active duty pursuant to section 4(c)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, which application was denied. Such registrant shall be retained in Class I-D until such time as he is ordered to active duty or ceases to serve satisfactorily in such reserve component.

(g) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who is a fully qualified and accepted aviation cadet applicant of the Army, Navy, or Air Force, who has signed an agreement of service and is within such numbers as have been designated by the Secretary of Defense. Such registrant shall be retained in Class I-D during the period covered by such agreement but in no case in excess of four months.

(h) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who is a student enrolled in an officer procurement program at a military college the curriculum of which is approved by the Secretary of Defense.
§ 1622.14 Class I-O: Conscientious objector available for civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest. (a) In Class I-O shall be placed every registrant who would have been classified in Class I-A but for the fact that he has been found, by reason of religious training and belief, to be conscientiously opposed to both combatant and noncombatant training and service in the armed forces.

(b) Section 6(j) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, provides in part as follows:

Religious training and belief in this connection means an individual's belief in a relation to a Supreme Being involving duties superior to those arising from any human relation, but does not include essentially political, sociological, or philosophical views or a merely personal moral code.

§ 1622.15 Class I-S: Student deferred by statute. (a) In Class I-S shall be placed any registrant who has not attained the twentieth anniversary of the day of this birth and who is satisfactorily pursuing a full-time course of instruction at a high school or similar institution of learning. Such registrant shall be retained in Class I-S(1) until the time of his graduation from such school or institution, or (2) until he attains the twentieth anniversary of the day of his birth, or (3) until he ceases satisfactorily to pursue such course of instruction, whichever is the earliest. The date of the classification in Class I-S and the date of its termination shall be entered in the "Remarks" column of the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102) and be identified on that record as Class I-S H).

(b) In Class I-S shall be placed any registrant who while satisfactorily pursuing a full-time course of instruction at a college university, or similar institution of learning and during his academic year at such institution is ordered to report for induction, except that no registration shall be placed in Class I-S under the provisions of this paragraph (1) who has previously been placed in Class I-S thereunder or (2) who, prior to June 19, 1951, had his induction postponed under section 6(i)(2) of the Selective Service Act of 1948, as amended, or was deferred to as a student under section 6(h) of such act. A registrant who is placed in Class I-S under the provisions of this paragraph shall be retained in Class

I-S (1) until the end of his academic year, or (2) until he ceases satisfactorily to pursue such course of instruction, whichever is the earlier. The date of the classification in Class I-S and the date of its termination shall be entered in the "Remarks" column of the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102) and be identified on that record as Class I-S (c).

§ 1622.16 Class I-W: Conscientious objector performing civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest. (a) In Class I-W shall be placed any registrant who has entered upon and is performing civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest, in accordance with the order of the local board.

(b) In Class I-W shall be placed any registrant who has completed a period of twenty-four consecutive months of civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest, subsequent to being ordered to such work by the local board, and who has been released from such work by the local board. Each such registrant shall be identified on all records by following his classification with the abbreviation "Rel." and, upon attaining an age beyond the maximum age of liability for military service under the provisions of the selective service law, all such registrants shall be reclassified in Class V-A.

CLASS II

§ 1622.20 General rules for classification in Class II. (a) On the local board is placed the responsibility, under applicable rules and regulations, of deciding which men should be deferred because of their civilian activities. It is in the national interest and of paramount importance to our national security that civilian activities which are contributing to the national health, safety, or interest should be disrupted as little as possible, consistent with the fundamental purpose of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended.

(b) No deferment from training and service shall be made in the case of any individual except upon the basis of the status of such individual.

(c) The local board may avail itself of the assistance of all Federal, State, or local agencies to obtain information which will help it to determine whether a claim for occupational deferment should be granted.

(d) No local board, appeal board, or other agency of appeal of the Selective Service System shall be required to postpone or defer any person by reason of his activity in study, research, or medical, dental, veterinary, optometric, osteopathic, scientific, pharmaceutical, chiropractic, chiropodial, or other endeavors found to be necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest solely on the basis of any test, examination, selection system, class standing, or any other means conducted, sponsored, administered, or prepared by any agency or department of the Federal Government or any private institution, corporation, association, partnership, or individual employed by an agency or department of the Federal Government.
§ 1622.21 Length of deferments in Class II. (a) Class II deferments shall be for a period of one year or less. If there is a change in the registrant's status during the period of deferment in Class II, his classification shall be reopened and considered anew.

(b) At the expiration of the period of a registrant's deferment in Class II, his classification shall be reopened and he shall be classified anew in the manner provided in part 1625 of this chapter. The registrant may be continued in Class II for a further period of one year or less if such classification is warranted. The same rules shall apply when classifying a registrant at the end of each successive period for which he has been classified in Class II.

(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the local board to retain in Class II any registrant when the reason for his occupational classification has ceased to exist.
§ 1622.22 Class II-A: Registrant deferred because of civilian occupation (except agriculture and activity in study). In Class II-A shall be placed any registrant whose employment in industry, or other occupation or employment, or whose continued service in an office (other than an office described in § 1622.41) under the United States, or any State, Territory, ore possession, or the District of Columbia, or whose activity in research, or medical, scientific, or other endeavors is found to be necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest.

§ 1622.23 Necessary employment defined. (a) A registrant's employment in industry or other occupation, service in office, or activity in research, or medical, scientific, or other endeavors, shall be considered to be necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest only when all of the following conditions exist:

(1) The registrant is, or but for a seasonal or temporary interruption would be, engaged in such activity.

(2) The registrant cannot be replaced because of a shortage of persons with his qualifications or skill in such activity.

(3) The removal of the registrant would cause a material loss of effectiveness in such activity.
(b) The President may, from time to time (1) designate special categories of occupation, employment, or activity essential to the national health, safety, or interest; and (2) prescribe regulations governing the deferment of individual registrants engaged in such occupations, employments, or activities.

§1622.24 Class II-C: Registrant deferred because of agricultural occupation. (a) In Class II-C shall be placed any registrant who is employed in the production for market of a substantial quantity of those agricultural commodities which are necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest, but only when all of the conditions described in paragraph (a) of § 1622.23 are found to exist.

(b) The production for market of a substantial quantity of agricultural commodities should be measured in terms of the average annual production per farm worker which is marketed from a local average farm of the type under consideration. The production of agricultural commodities for consumption by the worker and his family, or traded for subsistence purposes, should not be considered s production for market. Production which is in excess of that required for the subsistence of the farm families on the farm under consideration should be considered as production for market.

§ 1622.25 Class II-S: Registrant deferred because of activity in study. (a) In Class II-S shall be placed any registrant whose activity in study is found to be necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest.

(b) A registrant's activity in study may be considered to be necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest when any of the following conditions exist:

(1) The registrant (i) was accepted on or before July 1, 1951, for admission by a graduate school to the class next commencing for a full-time course of instruction as a candidate for a graduate degree and, if such class has commenced, has entered upon such course, or (ii) is a graduate student seeking a graduate degree and is pursuing a full-time course of instruction in a graduate school to which he was admitted on or before July 1, 1951, and (iii) the graduate school at which he is in attendance has certified that he currently is meeting degree requirements and is expected to attain his degree.

(2) The registrant (i) was accepted on or before July 1, 1951, for admission by a professional school of medicine, dentistry, veterinary medicine, osteopathy, optometry, pharmacy, chiropractic, or chiropody to the class next commencing and, if such class has commenced, has entered such school, or (ii) is a student in any such professional school to which he was admitted on or before July 1, 1951, and (iii) the school at which he is in attendance has certified that he is satisfactorily pursuing a full-time course of instruction leading to his graduation.

(3) The registrant (i) has been accepted after July 1, 1951, for admission by a graduate school to the class next commencing for a full-time course of instruction as a candidate for a graduate degree and, if such class has commenced, has entered upon such course, and (ii) in his last full-time undergraduate academic year at a college, university, or academic year at a college, university, or similar institution of learning achieved a scholastic standing on that year's work which ranked him for that year within the upper one-half of the full-time male students in his class or has attained a score of 75 or more on the qualification test prescribed by the Director of Selective Service pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section, and (iii) the graduate school at which he is in attendance has certified that he currently is meeting degree requirements and is expected to attain his degree.

(4) The registrant (1) has been accepted after July 1, 1951, for admission by a professional school of medicine, dentistry, veterinary medicine, osteopathy, optometry, pharmacy, chiropractic, or chiropody to the class next commencing and, if such class has commenced, has entered such school, and (ii) in his last full-time academic year at a college, university, or similar institution of learning prior to his entrance into such professional school achieved a scholastic standing on that year's work which ranked him for that year within the upper one-half of the full-time male students in his class or has attained a score of 70 or more on the qualification test referred to in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, and (iii) the school at which he is in attendance has certified that he is satisfactorily pursuing a full-time course of instruction leading to his graduation.

(5) The registrant has been pursuing a course of instruction which requires the completion of either five, six, or seven years of full-time undergraduate study to qualify him for the first academic degree and has successfully completed his fourth, fifth, or sixth year, as the case may be, at a college, university, or similar institution of learning and in his last completed undergraduate year achieved a scholastic standing on that year's work which ranked him for that year within the upper three-fourths of the full-time male students in his class or has attained a score of 70 or more on the qualification test referred to in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, and has been accepted for admission by a college, university, or similar institution of learning to the fifth-year, sixth year, or seventh-year class next commencing for a full-time course of instruction or has entered upon and is satisfactorily pursuing such course.

(6) The registrant has successfully completed his third year at a college, university, or similar institution of learning and achieved a scholastic standing on his third year's work which ranked him for that year within the upper three-fourths of the full-time male students in his class or has attained a score of 70 or more on the qualification test referred to in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, and has been accepted for admission by a college, university, or similar institution of learning to the fourth-year class next commencing for a full-time course of instruction or has entered upon and is satisfactorily pursuing such course.

(7) The registrant has successfully completed his second year at a college, university, or similar institution of learning and achieved a scholastic standing on his second year's work which ranked him for that year within the upper two-thirds of the full-time male students in his class or has attained a score of 70 or more on the qualification test referred to in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, and has been accepted for admission by a college, university, or similar institution of learning to the third-year class next commencing for a full-time course of instruction or has entered upon and is satisfactorily pursuing such course.

(8) The registrant has successfully completed his first year at a college, university, or similar institution of learning and achieved a scholastic standing on his first year's work which ranked him for that year within the upper one-half of the full-time male students in his class or has attained a score of 70 or more on the qualification test referred to in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, and has been accepted for admission by a college, university, or similar institution of learning to the second-year class next commencing for a full-time course of instruction or has entered upon and is satisfactory pursuing such course.
(c) The Director of Selective Service is authorized to prescribe such qualification test or tests as he may deem necessary for carrying out the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section and to prescribe the procedures for the administration of such test or tests, for the certification of the results thereof, and for the certification of any other information required in carrying out the provisions of paragraph (b).
CLASS III

§ 1622.30 Class III-A: Registrant with a child or children; and registrant deferred by reason of extreme hardship and privation to dependents. (a) In Class III-A shall be placed any registrant who has a child or children with whom he maintains a bona fide family relationship in their home.

(b) In Class III-A shall be placed any registrant whose induction into the armed forces would result in extreme hardship and privation (1) to his wife, divorced wife, child, parent, grandparent, brother, or sister who is dependent upon him for support, or (2) to a person under 18 years of age or a person of any age who is physically or mentally handicapped whose support the registrant has assumed in good faith; provided that a person shall be considered to be a dependent of a registrant under this paragraph only when such person is either a citizen of the United States or lives in the United States, its Territories, or possessions.

(c) (1) The term "child" as used in this section shall include a legitimate or an illegitimate child from the date of its conception, a child legally adopted, a stepchild, a foster child, and a person who is supported in good faith by the registrant in a relationship similar to that of parent and child but shall not include any person 18 years of age or over unless he is physically or mentally handicapped.
(2) No registrant shall be placed in Class III-A because he has a child which is not yet born unless prior to the time the local board mails him an order to report for induction, there is filed with the local board the certificate of a licensed physician stating that the child has been conceived.

(d) In the consideration of a dependency claim, any payments of allowances which are payable by the United States to the dependents of persons serving in the Armed Forces of the United States shall be taken into consideration, but the fact that such payments of allowances are payable shall not be deemed conclusively to remove the grounds for deferment when the dependency is based upon financial considerations and shall not be deemed to remove the grounds for deferment when the dependency is based upon other than financial considerations and cannot be eliminated by financial assistance to the dependents.
CLASS IV

§ 1622.40 Class IV-A: Registrant who has completed service; sole surviving son. (a) In Class IV-A shall be placed any registrant who falls within any of the following categories:

(1) A registrant who served honorably on active duty between December 7, 1941, and September 2, 1945, for a period in excess of 90 days, in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the Public Health Service, or the armed forces of any country allied with the United States in World War II prior to September 2, 1945.

(2) A registrant who served honorably on active duty between September 16, 1940, and June 24, 1948, for a period of 12 months or more in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the Public Health Service, or the armed forces of any country allied with the United States in World War II prior to September 2, 1945.

(3) A registrant who, after June 24, 1948, was honorably discharged upon the completion of a period of three years or more of active duty in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, or the Public Health Service.

(4) A registrant who is the sole surviving son of a family of which one or more sons or daughters were killed in action or died in line of duty while serving in the armed forces of the United States, or subsequently died as a result of injuries received or disease incurred during such service.
(b) For the purpose of computation of periods of active duty referred to in subparagraphs (1), (2), or (3) of paragraph (1) of this section, no credit shall be allowed for-

(1) Periods of active duty training performed as a member of a reserve component pursuant to an order or call to active duty solely for training purposes;

(2) Periods of active duty in which the service consisted solely of training under the Army specialized training program, the Army Air Force college training program, or any similar program under the jurisdiction of the Navy, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard;

(3) Periods of active duty as a cadet of the United States Military Academy or United States Coast Guard Academy, or as a midshipman at the United States Naval Academy, or in a preparatory school after nomination as a principal, alternate, or candidate for admission to any such academies; or

(4) Periods of active duty in any of the armed forces while being processed for entry into or separation from any educational program or institution referred to in subparagraphs (2) or (3) of this paragraph.
§ 1622.41 Class IV-B: Officials deferred by law. In Class IV-B shall be placed any registrant who is the Vice President of the United States; a governor of a State, Territory or possession, or any other official chosen by the voters of the entire State, Territory or possession, a member of a legislative body of the United States or of a State, Territory or possession; a judge of a court of record of the United States or of a State, Territory or possession, or the District of Columbia.

§ 1622.42 Class IV-C: Aliens. (a) In Class IV-C shall be placed any registrant who is an alien and who has not been admitted to the United States for permanent residence and who has not remained in the United States for a period exceeding one year. When such a registrant has been within the United States for two or more periods of less than one year and the total of such periods exceeds one year, he shall be deemed to have remained in the United States for a period exceeding one year. In computing the length of such periods, any portion of one day shall be counted as one full day. When any such registrant has remained in the United States for a period exceeding one year, he becomes liable for training and service in the Armed Forces of the United States and shall be classified as available for military service unless he is found to be eligible for another classification for a reason other than his alien status.

(b) In Class IV-C shall be placed any registrant who is an alien and who has not been admitted to the United States for permanent residence but who has remained in the United States for a period exceeding one year and who has, prior to his induction, made application to be relieved from liability for training and service in the Armed Forces of the United States by filing with the local board an Application by Alien for Relief from Training and Service in the Armed Forces (SSS Form No. 130), executed in duplicate. The local board shall forward the original of such form to the Director of Selective Service through the State Director of Selective Service and shall retain the duplicate in the registrant's Cover Sheet (SSS-Form No 101).

(c) In Class IV-C shall be placed any registrant who is an alien and who is certified by the Department of State to be, or otherwise establishes that he is, exempt from military service under the terms of a treaty or international agreement between the United States and the country of which he is a national.

(d) In Class IV_C shall be placed any registrant who is an alien and who has departed from the United States. Such alien shall be placed in Class IV-C even though he is a delinquent but this classification shall in no way relieve him from liability for prosecution for violation of the selective service law. If any registrant so classified under this paragraph returns to the United States, his classification shall be reopened and he shall be classified anew.
§ 1622.43 Class IV-D: Minister of religion or divinity student. (a) In Class IV-D shall be placed any registrant:

(1) Who is a regular minister of religion;

(2) Who is a duly ordained minister or religion;

(3) Who is a student preparing for the ministry under the direction of a recognized church or religious organization and who is satisfactorily pursuing a full-time course of instruction in a recognized theological or divinity school; or

(4) Who is a student preparing for the ministry under the direction of a recognized church or religious organization and who is satisfactorily pursuing a full-time course of instruction leading to entrance into a recognized theological or divinity school in which he has been pre-enrolled.
(b) Section 16 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, contains in part the following provisions:

SEC. 16. When used in this title--* * * (g)(1) the term "duly ordained minister of religion" means a person who has been ordained, in accordance with the ceremonial, ritual, or discipline of a church, religious sect, or organization established on the basis of a community of faith and belief, doctrines and practices of a religious character, to preach and to teach the doctrines of such church, sect, or organization and to administer the rites and ceremonies thereof in public worship, and who as his regular and customary vocation preaches and teaches the principles of religion and administers the ordinances of public worship as embodied in the creed or principles of such church, sect, or organization.

(2) The term "regular minister of religion" means one who as his customary vocation preaches and teaches the principles of religion of a church, a religious sect, or organization of which he is a member, without having been formally ordained as a minister of religion, and who is recognized by such church, sect, or organization as a regular minister.

(3) The term "regular or duly ordained minister of religion" does not include a person who irregularly or incidentally preaches and teaches the principles of religion of a church, religious sect, or organization and does not include any person who may have been duly ordained a minister in accordance with the ceremonial, rite, or discipline of a church, religious sect or organization, but who does not regularly, as a vocation, teach and preach the principles of religion and administer the ordinances of public worship as embodied in the creed or principles of his church, sect, or organization.
§ 1622.44 Class IV-F: Physically, mentally, or morally unfit. In Class IV-F shall be placed any registrant (a) who is found to be physically or mentally unfit for any service in the armed forces; (b) who, under the procedures and standards prescribed by the Secretary of Defense, is found to be morally unacceptable for any service in the armed forces; (c) who has been convicted of a criminal offense which may be punished by death or by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and who is not eligible for classification into a class available for service; or (d) who has been separated from the armed forces by discharge other than an honorable discharge or a discharge under honorable conditions, or an equivalent type of release from service, and for whom the local board has not received a statement from the armed forces that the registrant is morally acceptable notwithstanding such discharge or separation.

CLASS V

§ 1622.50 Class V-A: Registrant over the age of liability for military service. (a) In Class V-A shall be placed every registrant who has attained the twenty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth except (1) those registrants who are in active military service in the armed forces and are in Class I-C, (2) those registrants who are performing civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest in accordance with the order of the local board and are in Class I-W, (3) those registrants who have consented to induction, and (4) those registrants who on June 19, 1951, or at any time thereafter, were deferred under the provisions of section 6b of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended. Except as is otherwise provided in this paragraph, registrants who prior to attaining the twenty-sixth anniversary of the day of their birth have been classified in some other class shall, as soon as practicable after attaining the twenty-sixth anniversary of the day of their birth, be reclassified into Class V-A.

(b) In Class V-A shall be placed every registrant who has attained the thirty-fifth anniversary of the day of his birth except (1) those registrants who are in active military service in the armed forces and are in Class I-C, and (2) those registrants who are performing civilian work contributions to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest in accordance with the order of the local board and are in Class I-W. Except as is otherwise provided in this paragraph, registrants who prior to attaining the thirty-fifth anniversary of the day of their birth have been classified in some other class shall, as soon as practicable after attaining the thirty-fifth anniversary of the day of their birth, be reclassified into Class V-A.

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

§ 1622.60 Director may direct that eligibility for particular classification be disregarded. The Director of Selective Service, notwithstanding any other provisions of the regulations in this chapter, may direct that any registrant shall be classified or reclassified without regard to his eligibility for a particular classification.

§ 1622.61 Identifying a registrant whose registration is cancelled. Whenever the registration of a registrant is cancelled the local board shall enter the abbreviation "Canc." On all of its records with reference to such registrant.

§ 1622.62 Identifying a registrant whose induction is postponed. A registrant who has been classified in Class I-A or Class I-A-O, and whose induction has been postponed for any reason whatsoever, shall be identified on all records by following his classification with the abbreviation "(P)".

§ 1622.63 Identifying registrants who are deceased. Whenever a registrant dies, the local board shall enter the abbreviation "Dec." on all of its records with reference to such registrant.

§ 1622.64 Identification of Class I-C registrant separated from armed forces. Whenever a registrant is separated from the armed forces after June 24, 1948, other than by death, and such registrant is retained in Class I-C under the provisions of § 1622.12, his classification shall be followed with the identification "Disc." On all records with reference to such registrant unless he is transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces, in which case the provisions of §1622.65 shall apply.

§ 1622.65. Identification of Class I-C registrant transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces. Whenever a registrant is transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces after completion of his period of service pursuant to section 4 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended , and such registrant is retained in Class I-C under the provisions of § 1622.12, his classification shall be following with the identification "Res." on all records of such registrant.

6. a. Section 1623.2 of Part 1623, Classification Procedure, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1623.2 Consideration of classes. Every registrant shall be placed in Class I-A under the provisions of § 1622.10 of this chapter except that when grounds are established to place a registrant in one or more of the classes listed in the following table, the registrant shall be classified in the lowest class for which he is determined to be eligible, with Class I-A-O considered the highest class and Class I-C considered the lowest class according to the following table:

Class:

I-A-O IV-A

I-O IV-B

I-S IV-C

II-A IV-D

II-C IV-F

II-S V-A

I-D I-W

III-A I-C
b. Section 1623.3 of Part 1623 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1623.3 Physical examination. Physical examination of registrants classified in Class I-A, Class I-A-O, or Class I-O shall be accomplished under the provisions of part 1628 of this chapter.

c. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of § 1623.4 of Part 1623 are amended to read as follows:
(a) As soon as practicable after the local board has classified or reclassified a registrant (except a registrant who is classified in Class I-C because of his entering active service in the armed forces, or in Class I-W because of having entered upon civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest), it shall mail a notice thereof on a Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) to the registrant. When a registrant is classified in Class I-S, Class II-A, Class II-C, or Class I-S the date of the termination of the deferment shall be entered on the Notices of Classification (SSS Form No. 110).

(b) As soon as practicable after the local board has classified or reclassified a registrant into any class other than Class V-A, it shall mail a notice thereof on a Classification Advice (SSS Form No. 111) to every person who has on file any written request for the current deferment of the registrant. When a registrant is classified in Class I-S, Class II-A, Class II-C, or in Class II-S the date of the termination of the deferment shall be entered on the Classification Advice (SSS Form No. 111).
d. Section 1623.8 of Part 1623 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1623.8 Register of conscientious objectors. The local board shall list on a register of conscientious objectors each registrant whose claim for special classification as a conscientious objector has been sustained either by the local board or upon appeal. The register of conscientious objectors shall show separately those registrants who have been classified in Class I-A-O as available for noncombatant military service and those who have been classified in Class I-O as available for civilian work contribution to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest. No special form is provided for this register.

7. a. Paragraph (a) of § 1624.1 of Part 1624, Appearance before local board, is amended to read as follows:
(a) Every registrant, after his classification is determined by the local board (except a classification which is itself determined upon an appearance before the local board under the provisions of this part), shall have an opportunity to appear in person before the member or members of the local board designated for the purpose if he files a written request therefore within 10 days after the local board has mailed a Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) to him. Such 10-day period may not be extended.
b. Paragraphs (c) and (d) of § 1624.1 of Part 1624 are revoked.

c. Paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) of § 1624.2 of Part 1624 are amended to read as follows:
(c) After the registrant has appeared before the member or members of the local board designated for the purpose, the local board shall consider the new information which it receives and, if the local board determines that such new information justifies a change in the registrant's classification, the local board shall reopen and classify the registrant anew. If the local board determines that such new information does not justify a change in the registrant's classification, it shall not reopen the registrant's classification.

(d) After the registrant has appeared before the member or members of the local board designated for the purpose, the local board, as soon as practicable after it again classifies the registrant, or determines not to reopen the registrant's classification, shall mail notice thereof on Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) to the registrant and on Classification Advice (SSS Form No. 111) to the persons entitled to receive such notice or advice on an original classification under the provisions of § 1623.4 of this chapter.

(e) Each such classification or determination not to reopen the classification made under this section shall be followed by the same right of appeal as in the case of an original classification.
8. a. Paragraph (b) of § 1625.1 of Part 1625, Reopening and considering anew registrant's classification, is amended to read as follows:
(b) Each classified registrant and each person who has filed a request for the registrant's deferment shall, within 10 days after it occurs, report to the local board in writing any fact that might result in the registrant being placed in a different classification such as, but not limited to, any change in his occupational, marital, military, or dependency status, or in his physical condition. Any other person should report to the local board in writing any such fact within 10 days after having knowledge thereof.
b. Section 1625.3 of Part 1625 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1625.3 When registrant's classification shall be reopened and considered anew. (a) The local board shall reopen and consider anew the classification of a registrant upon the written request of the State Director of Selective Service or the Director of Selective Service and upon receipt of such request shall immediately cancel any Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252) which may have been issued to the registrant.

(b) The local board shall reopen and consider anew the classification of a registrant to whom it has mailed an Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252) whenever facts are presented to the local board which establish the registrant's eligibility for classification into Class I-S because he is satisfactorily pursuing a full-time course of instruction at a college, university, or similar institution of learning.

9. a. Section 1626.1 of Part 1625, Appeal to Appeal Board is amended to read as follows:
§1621.6.1 Appeal by Director and State Director. Either the Director of Selective Service or the State Director of Selective Service as to local boards in his State may appeal from any determination of a local board at any time.

b. Section 1626.14 of Part 1626 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1626.14 Time when record to be forwarded on appeal. The registrant's file shall be forwarded to the appeal board, or appropriate panel thereof, immediately after the local board has complied with the provisions of § 1626.13, but in no event later than five days after the appeal is taken. The local board shall enter in the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102) the date it transmits the registrant's file to the appeal board or appropriate panel thereof.

c. Section 1626.22 of Part 1626 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1626.22 Action if appeal board disqualified. If the appeal board, or panel thereof, upon receiving the file of a registrant, determines that it cannot act on the appeal for any reason, it shall forward the file to the State Director of Selective Service. If there is more than one panel of the appeal board, the State Director of Selective Service shall designate another panel of the appeal board to act upon the appeal. If there is no additional panel of the appeal board, the State Director of Selective Service shall designate another appeal board in the State to act upon the appeal. If there are no additional appeal boards in the State, the Director of Selective Service, upon the request of the State Director of Selective Service, shall designate an appeal board in a neighboring State to act upon the appeal, and the State Director of Selective Service shall transmit the file to the State Director of Selective Service for the neighboring State for referral to the designated appeal board. The designated appeal board, or panel thereof, shall act on the appeal in the same manner and make the same records as in the case of an appeal from a local board whose records it normally reviews, except that all entries and records will be made in red ink. The State Director of Selective Service shall advise the local board from which the appeal was taken when a file is referred to an appeal board or appeal board panel other than the one normally acting on appeals from such local board and shall state the reason thereunder.

d. Paragraph (a) of § 1626.24 of Part 1626 is amended to read as follows:
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of § 1626.51 regarding a determination of a local board on the question whether a registrant is a person required by law to be registered, the appeal board shall consider appeals in the order in which they are received unless otherwise directed by the Director of Selective Service, in which event, they shall be considered in such order as the Director of Selective Service shall prescribe.
e. Subparagraphs (3) and (4) of paragraph (a) of § 1626.25 of Part 1626 are amended to read as follows:
(e) If the registrant claims that he is, by reason of religious training and belief, conscientiously opposed to participation in war in any form and to be conscientiously opposed to participation in both combatant and noncombatant training and service in the armed forces, the appeal board shall first determine whether or not the registrant is eligible for classification in a class lower than Class I-O. If the appeal board finds that the registrant is not eligible for classification in a class lower than Class I-O, but does find that the registrant is eligible for classification in Class I-O, it shall place him in that class.
(4) If the appeal board determines that such registrant is not entitled to classification in either a class lower than Class I-O or in Class I-O, it shall transmit the entire file to the United States Attorney for the judicial district in which the office of the appeal board is located for the purpose of securing an advisory recommendation from the Department of Justice.
f. Paragraphs (b) and (c) of § 1626.25 of Part 1626 are amended to read as follows:
(b) No registrant's file shall be forwarded to the United States Attorney by any appeal board and any file so forwarded shall be returned, unless in the "Minutes of Action by Local Board and Appeal Board" on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the record shows and the letter of transmittal states that the appeal board reviewed the file and determined that the registrant should not be classified in either Class I-A_O or Class I-O under the circumstances set forth in subparagraphs (2) or (4) of paragraph (a) of this section.

(c) The Department of Justice shall thereupon make an inquiry and hold a hearing on the character and good faith of the conscientious objections of the registrant. The registrant shall be notified of the time and place of such hearing and shall have an opportunity to be heard. If the objections of the registrant are found to be sustained, the Department of Justice shall recommend to the appeal board (1) that if the registrant is inducted into the armed forces, he shall be assigned to noncombatant service, or (2) that if the registrant is found to be conscientiously opposed to participation in such noncombatant service, he shall in lieu of induction be ordered by his local board to perform for a period of twenty-fur consecutive months civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest. If the Department of Justice finds that the objections of the registrant are not sustained, it shall recommend to the appeal board that such objections be not sustained.
10. Section 1627.3 of Part 1627, Appeal to the President, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1627.3 Appeal to President. The registrant, any person who claims to be a dependent of the registrant, or any person who prior to the classification appealed from filed a written request for the current occupational deferment of the registrant, at any time within 10 days after the mailing by the local board of the Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) notifying the registrant that the local board classification has been affirmed or changed, may appeal to the President if the registrant was classified by the appeal board in either Class I-A, Class I-A-O, or Class I-(, and one or more members of the appeal board dissented from such classification. The local board may permit any person who is entitled to appeal to the President under this section to do so, even though the 10-day period herein provided for such an appeal has elapsed, if it is satisfied that the failure of such person to appeal within such 10-day period was due to a lack of understanding of the right of appeal or to some other cause beyond the control of such person.

11. a. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of § 1628.2 of Part 1628, Physical examination, are amended to read as follows:
(a) When the local board is of the opinion that a registrant in Class I-A, Class I-A-O, or Class I-O has one or more of the obvious defects or manifest conditions listed in Part 1629 of this chapter it shall order the registrant to present himself for medical interview at a specified time and place by mailing to such registrant a Notice to Registrant to Appeal for Medical Interview (SSS Form No. 219).

(b) Paragraph (c) of § 1628.4 of Part 1628 is amended to read as follows:

(c) After completion of the medical interview the local board shall determine, after considering the findings and recommendations of the medical advisor to the local board, whether or not to order the registrant to report for armed forces physical examination. The local board shall enter the date of the medical interview in the appropriate column of the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102).
C. Section 1628.10 of Part 1628 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1628.10 Who will be examined. Every registrant, before he is ordered to report for induction, or ordered to perform civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest, shall be given an armed forces physical examination under the provisions of this part, except that a registrant who is a delinquent and a registrant who has volunteered for induction may be ordered to report for induction without being given an armed forces physical examination.

d. Paragraphs (b) and (c) of § 1628.11 of Part 1628 are amended to read as follows:
(b) In complying with such directive, the local board shall mail an Order to Report for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 223) to registrants who have been classified in Class I-A, Class I-A-O, and Class I-O without regard to whether the registrants have requested or will request a personal appearance before the local board and without regard to whether an appeal has been or will be taken. The local board in complying with such directive shall, so far as is practicable, select and order to report for armed forces physical examination first such registrants who are volunteers in the sequence in which they have volunteered for induction or for civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest and then such registrants who are nonvolunteers in the order of their liability for service.

(c) The local board may also mail an Order to Report for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 223) to any registrant who is classified in a class other than Class I-A, Class I-A-O, or Class I-O if it determines that his induction may shortly occur. The local board shall mail an Order to Report for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 223) to a registrant whenever directed to do so by the Director of Selective Service or the State Director of Selective Service.
e. Paragraph (b) of § 1628.15 of Part 1628 is amended to read as follows:
(b) A registrant selected for armed forces physical examination shall be transferred for such examination to the local board having jurisdiction of the area in which he is at that time located whenever, from information in his file, it appears that the registrant is located in one and the registrant's own local board is located in another of the following: The continental United States, the Territory of Alaska, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, or the Canal Zone.

12. a. Section 1630.1 of Part 1630, Volunteers, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1630.1 Who may volunteer. (a) Any registrant who has reached the eighteenth anniversary of the day of his birth and who has not reached the twenty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth may volunteer at his local board for induction into the armed forces by filing an Application for Voluntary Induction (SSS Form No. 254).

(b) Any person after attaining the age of seventeen may, with the written consent of his parents or guardian, volunteer at his local board for induction into the armed forces by filing an Application for Voluntary Induction (SSS Form No. 254) together with such written consent.

b. Paragraph (b) of § 1630.2 of Part 1630 is amended to read as follows:
(b) A registrant who is so far from his local board that it would be a hardship for him to appear in person at such local board in order to volunteer may present himself at the local board having jurisdiction of the area in which he is at the time located, and such local board shall assist him by correspondence or other means to volunteer through his own local board to the end that all uncompleted procedure with reference to such man's registration, classification, selection, and induction may be completed as soon as possible, including when necessary, transfer for classif8cation, transfer for physical examination, transfer for delivery, or any of such steps which may be considered proper for the purpose.

c. Paragraph (b) of § 1630.3 of Part 1630 is amended to read as follows:

(b) If a person not required to be registered volunteers for induction, including a person who volunteers under the provisions of paragraph (b) of § 1630.1, he shall be registered and shall be given a selective service number in exactly the same manner as any other registrant. A "V: shall be placed at the top of the Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) to indicate that such person is a volunteer.

d. Paragraph (c) of § 1630.4 of Part 1630 is amended to read as follows:
(c) Under the provisions of § 1622.44 of this chapter he is found to be physically, mentally, or morally unfit.
13. a. Section 1631.1 of Part 1631, Quotas and credits, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1631.1 Quotas and credits. Quotas of men to be inducted for training and service in the armed forces shall be determined for each State, Territory, possession, and the District of Columbia and for the subdivisions thereof, on the basis of the number of registrants therein who have been found to be available for service in the armed forces. In fixing such quotas, credits shall be given for residents of such subdivisions who are found to be serving on active duty in the armed forces on the date fixed for determining such quotas. Until the actual numbers necessary for determining the quotas are known, the quotas may be based on estimates, and subsequent adjustments thereof shall be made when such actual numbers are known.

b. Paragraphs (a) and (c) of § 1631.2 of Part 1631 are amended to read as follows:
(a) The Director of Selective Service shall determine the quotas, credits, and debits for the nation and for each State. Each State Director of Selective Service shall be required periodically to report the total number of registrants in the State and the total number of registrants therein by classifications on Report of Availability and Summary of Classification (SSS Form No. 116). Each State Director of Selective Service shall also periodically report the number of registrants inducted from his State on State Monthly Report of Deliveries, Inductions and Examinations (SSS Form No. 262).
* * * * *
(c) When a person on active duty in the armed forces is separated from active duty status, the appropriate State Director of Selective Service will receive a report of separation from the armed forces for each such person.
c. Section 1631.3 of Part 1631 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1631.3 Determination of local board quotas, credits, and debits. The State Director of Selective Service for each State shall determine the quotas, credits, and debits for each local board in his State. He shall from time to time call upon each local board to report the number of registrants in the local board, the number by classifications, and the number who have been found acceptable for service in the armed forces.

d. Section 1631.5 of Part 1631 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1631.5 Calls by the Director of Selective Service. The Director of Selective Service shall, upon receipt of a call or requisition from the Secretary of Defense, allocate such call or requisition among the several States. The Director of Selective Service in allocating such call may provide for the selection of persons by age group or groups whenever he deems such action is necessary in order that persons in older age groups shall, on a Nation-wide basis, be selected and delivered for induction before persons in younger age groups. The Director of Selective Service shall issue to the State Director of Selective Service of each State concerned a Notice of Call on State (SSS Form No. 200) for the number of men found acceptable for service in the armed forces allocated to each State. The Director of Selective Service shall send two copies of each such Notice of Call on State (SSS Form No. 200) to the Secretary of Defense.

e. Section 1631.6 of Part 1631 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1631.6 Calls by State Director of Selective Service. The State Director of Selective Service, upon receiving a Notice of Call on State (SSS Form No. 200) from the Director of Selective Service shall (a) allocate to the local boards concerned within his State the number of men which his State is called upon to furnish for service in the armed forces and (b) issue to each local board concerned a Notice of Call on Local Board (SSS Form No. 201) directing the local board to select and deliver for induction the number of men who have been found to be acceptable for service in the armed forces fixed in such

Notice of Call on Local Board (SSS Form 201). The State Director of Selective Service shall send a copy of each Notice of Call on Local Board (SSS Form No. 201) to the commanding officer of the joint examining and induction station to which the selected men are directed to report for induction.

f. Subparagraph (2) of paragraph (a) of §1631.7 of Part 1631 is amended to read as follows:

(2) Nonvolunteers who have attained the age of 18 years and 6 months in the order of their dates of birth with the oldest being selected first except that a delinquent registrant who has attained the age of 19 years shall be selected and ordered to report for induction before any other nonvolunteer. When two or more such registrants have the same date of birth they shall, as among themselves be selected in alphabetical order. No local board shall order for induction for training and service in the Armed Forces of the United States any person who has not attained the age of 19 unless there is not within the jurisdiction of such local board a sufficient number of persons who are deemed by such local board to be available for induction and who have attained the age of 19 to enable such local board to meet a call for men which it has been ordered to furnish for induction. Should it be necessary for a local board to order for induction persons who have not attained the age of 19, it shall order them in the order of their dates of birth, the oldest being selected first, but it shall not order any such person for induction if there is within the jurisdiction of the local board any persons who has not attained the age of 19, who is as much as ninety days older and who is deemed by the local board to be available for induction.

14. a. Section 1632.3 and 1632.4 of Part 1632, Delivery and induction, are revoked.
b. Paragraph (b) of § 1632 10 of Part 1632 is amended to read as follows:

(b) A registrant selected for induction shall be transferred for induction to the local board having jurisdiction of the area in which he is at that time located whenever, from information in his file, it appears that the registrant is located in one and the registrant's own local board is located in another of the following: The continental Untied States, the Territory of Alaska, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Gum, or the Canal Zone.

15. a. Section 1641.1 of Part 1641, Notice, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1641.1 Notice of requirements of Universal Military Training and Service Act. Every person shall be deemed to have notice of the requirements of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, upon publication by the President of a proclamation or other public notice fixing a time for any registration. This provision shall apply not only to registrants but to all other persons.

b. Paragraph (a) of § 1641.2 of Part 1641 is amended to read as follows:

(a) If a registrant or a person required to present himself for and submit to registration fails to perform any duty prescribed by the selective service law, or directions given pursuant thereto, within the required time, he shall be liable to fine and imprisonment under section 12 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended.
16. a. Section 1642.3 of Part 1642, Delinquents, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1642.3 Compliance with procedures of this part not condition precedent to prosecution. Compliance by a local board or any other agency of the Selective Service System with any or all of the procedures prescribed by the regulations in this part is not a condition precedent to the prosecution of any p4erson under the provisions of section 12 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended.

b. Section 1642.12 of Part 1642 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1642.12 Classification of registrant delinquent. Any delinquent registrant between the ages of 18 and 6 months and 26 years and any delinquent registrant between the ages of 26 and 35 who on June 19, 1951, or at any time thereafter , was deferred under the provisions of section 6 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, may be classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-O, whichever is applicable, regardless of other circumstances: Provided, That the following may not be classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-O under this section unless such action is specifically authorized by the Director of Selective Service:

(a) A delinquent registrant in Class I-C who, after completion of any period of active service in the Armed Forces of the United States under the provisions of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, has been separated from the armed forces of transferred to a reserve component thereof; or

(b) A delinquent registrant who by reason of his service in the armed forces is eligible for classification into Class IV-A.
c. Section 1642.13 of Part 1642 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1642.13 Certain delinquents to be ordered to report for induction. The local board shall order each delinquent registrant between the ages of 18 years and 6 months and 26 years and each delinquent registrant between the ages of 26 and 35 who on June 19, 1951, or at any time thereafter, was deferred under the provisions of section 6 of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, who is classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-O to report for induction in the manner provided in § 1631.7 of this chapter unless (a) it has already done so, or (b) pursuant to a written request of the United States Attorney, the local board determines not to order such registrant to report for induction.

d. Paragraph (a) of § 1642.31 of Part 1642 is amended to read as follows;
(a) Provided they are required and have not already been accomplished, the following steps shall be taken in connection with every man who has registered or who is required to register under the provisions of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended immediately upon his reporting to or being brought before a local board or immediately upon his being taken into custody or his being placed in confinement:

(a) He shall be registered; provided, that any law enforcement official or any other authorized person may act as registrar.
(*2) He shall complete his Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100).

(3) He shall complete his Special Form for Conscientious Objector (SSS Form No. 150), when applicable.

(4) He shall complete all other necessary forms.

(5) He may be physically examined.
17. a. Section 1650.1 of Part 1650, Registration, classification, physical examination, selection, and induction of persons in medical, dental, and allied specialist categories, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1650.1 Applicability of regulation sin this part. (a) The registration, classification, physical examination, selection, and induction of male persons in medical, dental, and allied specialist categories under section 4(i) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, shall be governed by the provisions of the regulations in this part except as otherwise provided for in this part. The provisions and definitions in Part 1602 of this chapter shall govern in the interpretation of the regulations in this part.

(b) The duties and liabilities imposed upon any person by section 4(i) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, any proclamation issued by the President pursuant thereto, any order issued by the Director of Selective Service pursuant thereto, and the regulations in this part, shall be in addition to and shall in nowise affect or be affected by the duties and liabilities imposed upon such person by other provisions of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, or by any other proclamation or regulations issued pursuant to such other provisions.
b. Section 1650.2 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1650.2 Overprinting of forms. All forms which are used by the Selective Service System in the registration, classification, physical examination, selection, and induction, and other processing of persons in medical, dental, and allied specialist categories under section 4(i) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, shall contain an overprint reading "Special Registration No. -----" with the number of the particular special registration entered in the space provided therefor.

c. Section 1650.3 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1650.3 Duty to be registered. (a) On the day or days and between the hours fixed by proclamation of the President or order of the Director of Selective Service for the special registration of any male persons under the provisions of section 4(i) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, every person required to do so by such proclamation or order shall present himself for and submit to registration before a duly designated registration official or the local board having jurisdiction in the area in which he has his permanent home or in which he may happen to be on that day or any of those days.

(b) Any person who has registered in accordance with any Presidential proclamation issued under title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and the regulations prescribed thereunder, and who thereafter is required to register pursuant to any proclamation of the President or order of the Director of Selective Service fixing the day or days for any special registration under section 4(i) of such act, shall, notwithstanding such previous registration, present himself for and submit to registration under such latter proclamation or order.
d. Section 1650.7 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1650.7 Responsibility for performance of duty. Every person subject to registration in any special registration of persons in medical, dental, or allied specialist categories shall have the same responsibility for performance of duty as is provided in § 1611.7 of this chapter.

e. Section 1650.8 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:

§ 1650.8 Registration, duties and procedures-accomplishment of registration. (a) The provisions of Parts 1612, 1613, 1617, and 1619 of this chapter shall be applicable to the special registration of persons in medical, dental, and allied specialist categories, except as otherwise provided in this section.

(b) Whenever a special registrant has been previously registered under title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the local board having jurisdiction over the registrant in such prior registration shall have jurisdiction over such special registrant.

(c) In registering persons who are in priority one or priority two, as defined by section 4(i)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the registrar shall not issue the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) after the Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) has been signed by a special registrant but shall give the special registrant a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100), three copies of Initial Data for Classification and Commissioning in Medical Services for Medical, Dental and Veterinary Corps (DD Form No. 390), and a return envelope addressed to the local board of the registrar, which forms shall be completed by the special registrant and mailed to the local board in the return envelope within five days after his registration.

(d) When the completed Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and the three completed copies of Initial Data for Classification and Commissioning in Medical Services for Medical, Dental and Veterinary Corps (DD Form No. 390) of a special registrant who is in priority one or priority two are received by the local board, the special registrant has been previously registered under the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the local board shall forward the Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1), together with the questionnaire and the three copies of the initial data form, to the local board having jurisdiction over such registrant in the prior registration, which local board upon receiving such documents shall prepare the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) and mail it to the special registrant. If the special registrant has not been previously registered, the local board shall carefully check the place of residence of such special registrant as indicated on line 2 of his Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) and if the local board finds that the place of residence shown is within its area, it shall prepare the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) and mail it to the special registrant. If the local board finds that the place of residence of the special registrant is not within its area, it shall dispose of the registration card, together with the questionnaire and the three copies of the initial data form, in the manner provided in § 1613.43 of this chapter, and the local board having jurisdiction over the place of residence upon receiving such documents shall prepare the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) and mail it to the special registrant.

(e) In registering persons who are in priority three or priority four, as defined by section 4(i)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the registrar shall not issue the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) after the Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) has been signed by a special registrant but shall deliver the registration card to the local board of the registrar. The Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) of such a special registrant shall then be processed, and the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) shall be prepared and mailed to the special registrant, in the manner provided in paragraph (d) of this section. The Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and the Initial Data for Classification and Commissioning in Medical Services for Medical, Dental and Veterinary Corps (DD Form No. 390) shall not be delivered to registrants who are in priority three or four until such time as is fixed by the Director of Selective Service.

(f) Separate Tally Sheets (SSS Form No. 4) shall be used for each special registration of persons in medical, dental, and allied specialist categories.
f. Paragraphs (c), (d), (e), and (f) of § 1650.10 of Part 1650 are amended to read as follows:
(c) If a special registrant has been previously registered under title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the local board shall assign the same selective service number to the new Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) as has been previously assigned to such registrant.

(d) The Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) shall be given or delivered to a special registrant in accordance with the provisions of § 1650.8.

(e) The local board shall prepare a Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101) for each special registrant. If a special registrant has been previously registered under title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the contents of his Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101) prepared in connection with the previous registration shall be removed therefrom and placed in the new cover sheet. A notation of such removal shall be placed on the empty cover sheet which shall then continue to be filed with the other cover sheets of the previous registration.

(f) If a special registrant has been previously registered under title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, a notation that he has registered in a subsequent special registration shall be placed on his Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) and on the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102) which were prepared in connection with such previous registration.
g. Section 1650.11 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1650.11 Classification. (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of Parts 1622 and 1623 of this chapter shall be applicable to the classification of special registrants including such provisions as relate to the transfer of a registrant for classification.

(b) Each special registrant who has not attained the fifty-first anniversary of the day of his birth shall be considered by the local board as available for military service until his eligibility for deferment or exemption from military service is clearly established to the satisfaction of the local board. The delivery to a special registrant of a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and an Initial Data for Classification and Commissioning in Medical Services for Medical, Dental and Veterinary Corps (DD Form No. 390) shall be notice to the registrant that unless information is presented to the local board, within the time specified for the return of the questionnaire and initial data form, which will justify his deferment or exemption from military service, the registrant will be classified in Class I-A.

(c) Every special registrant shall be placed in Class I-A under the provisions of § 1622.10 of this chapter except that when grounds are established to place such registrant in one or more of the classes listed in the following table, the special registrant shall be classified in the lowest class for which he is determined to be eligible, with Class I-A-O considered the highest class and Class I-C considered the lowest class according to the following table:
Class:

I-A-O IV-D

I-O IV-F

I-D V-A

II-A I-W

III-A I-C

IV-A

(d) A special registrant shall be placed in Class I-A-0 under the provisions of § 1622.11 of this chapter.
(e)(1) A special registrant shall be placed in Class I-C if he is on, or enters upon, active duty in the armed forces or the Public Health Service.

(2) A special registrant shall be placed in Class I-C if he has entered upon active duty in the armed forces after the date fixed for his registration in any special registration and has been separated therefrom by honorable discharge or discharge under honorable conditions or by an equivalent type of release from service, or has been so separated and transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces. Each such special registrant who has been transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces shall be identified on all records by following his classification with the abbreviation "Res.", and every other such special registrant shall be similarly identified with the abbreviation "Disc.". Upon attaining the fifty-first anniversary of the day of his birth, each such special registrant shall be reclassified in Class V-A.

(f) A special registrant shall be placed in Class I-D if he is or becomes a member of a reserve component of the armed forces or the Public Health Service.

(g) A special registrant shall be placed in Class I-O under the provisions of § 1622.14 of this chapter.

(h) A special registrant shall be placed in Class I-W under the provisions of § 1622.16 of this chapter.

(i) A special registrant shall be placed in Class II-A only if it is determined that (1) the medical, dental, or allied specialist service being performed by such registrant in his community is necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest, (2) the service performed by him cannot be performed by other medical, dental, or allied specialists who are in the community, and (3) the registrant cannot be replaced in the community by another person who can perform such medical, dental, or allied specialist service. It is the intent of these criteria that a special registrant shall be place in Class II-A when his induction would cause the availability of essential health services to fall below reasonable minimum standards. In making such determination, the local board shall give consideration to but shall not be bound by any advice offered by any committee established pursuant to section 4(j) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended.

(j) A special registrant shall be placed in Class III-A only if (1) it is determined that his induction into the armed forces would result in extreme hardship and privation to a wife, child, or parent, with whom he maintains a bona fide family relationship in their home, regardless of the date on which such bona fide family relationship was established, and (2) by reason of such determination it is considered advisable that he be deferred. The term "child" as used in this paragraph means a legitimate or an illegitimate child from the date of its conception, a child legally adopted, a stepchild, a foster child, and a person who is supported in good faith by the registrant in a relationship similar to that of parent and child, but shall not include any person 18 years of age or over unless he is physically or mentally handicapped.

(k) A special registrant shall be placed in Class IV-A only if he is the sole surviving son of a family of which one or more sons or daughters were killed in action or died in line of duty while serving in the Armed Forces of the United States, or subsequently died as a result of injuries received or disease incurred during such service.

(l) A special registrant shall be placed in Class IV-D under the provisions of § 1622.43 of this chapter.

(m) A special registrant shall be placed in Class IV-F either under the provisions of §1622.44 of this chapter or if he is otherwise not acceptable to the armed forces for service.

(n) A special registrant shall be placed in Class V-A if he has attained the fifty-first anniversary of the day of his birth unless (1) he is on active military service in the armed forces and is in Class I-C, or (2) he is performing civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest in accordance with the order of the local board and is in Class I-W. Except as is otherwise provided in this paragraph, every special registrant who prior to attaining the fifty-first anniversary of the day of his birth has been classified in some other class shall, as soon as practicable after attaining the fifty-first anniversary of the day of his birth, be reclassified into Class V-A.
h. Paragraphs (e) and (f) of section 1650.30 of Part 1650 are amended to read as follows:
(e) The State Director of Selective Service shall maintain a record at State Headquarters of the name, local board, date of birth, specialist category, and number of order of priority under section 4(i)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, of each special registrant who has been found acceptable for service in the armed forces. After the State Director of Selective Service has entered this information on such record, he shall forward the records received from the final examining agency of the armed forces for each special registrant to the registrant's local board.

(f) The Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62) for each special registrant who is found acceptable for service in the armed forces will show the specialist category in which the armed forces will accept him for service.
i. Paragraph (b) of § 1650.40 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:
(b) Special calls for specified numbers of male persons in any medical, dental, or allied specialist category shall, on the basis of the best information then available, be allocated, by the Director of Selective Service among the several States and by each State Director of Selective Service among the local boards in his State, in such manner that special registrants in each specialist category who are in Class I-A and Class I-A-O and have been found acceptable for service in the armed forces shall, on a Nation-wide basis within the Nation and a State-wide basis within each State, be ordered for induction in the following manner:

(1) Within each specialist category, those special registrants who are in a lower numbered order of priority as defined in section 4(i)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, shall be ordered to report for induction before special registrants who are in a higher numbered order of priority.

(2) 'Those special registrants who are in priority one or priority three, as defined in section 4(i)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, shall be ordered to report for induction in the order of their dates of birth with the youngest being selected first.

(3) Those special registrants who are in priority two, as defined by section 4(i)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, shall be ordered to report for induction according to their length of active duty in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, and the Public Health Service (exclusive of time spent in postgraduate training) subsequent to the completion of or release from a program or course of instruction referred to in priority two, as above defined, with those having the least number of full months of such service being selected first.

(4) Those special registrants who are in priority four, as defined by section 4(i)(2) of title I of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, shall be ordered to report for induction according to their length of active service in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, and the Public Health Service subsequent to September 16, 1940, with those having the least number of full months of such service being selected first.
j. Section 1650.44 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1650.44 Action by local board upon receipt of notice of a special call. Each local board, upon receiving a Notice of Call on Local Board (SSS Form No. 201) from the State Director of Selective Service for a specified number of men in a specialist category shall select and order to report for induction the number of such men required to fill the call from among its special registrants in that specialist category who have been classified in Class I-A and Class I-A-O and who have been found acceptable for service in the armed forces, except that a special registrant classified in Class I-A or Class I-A-0 who is a delinquent may be selected and ordered to report for induction notwithstanding the fact that he has not been found acceptable for service in the armed forces. Such special registrants shall be selected and ordered to report for induction in the order prescribed in paragraph (b) of § 1650.40; provided, that any such special registrant who is a delinquent shall, regardless of his age or length of prior active duty or service be selected and ordered to report for induction before any other special registrant in the same specialist category and priority. When two or more such special registrants have the same date of birth or the same number of full months of prior active duty or service, they shall, as among themselves, be selected in alphabetical order. The men so selected and ordered to report for induction shall be men to whom the local board has mailed a Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62) at least 21 days before the date fixed for induction; provided, that a special registrant classified in Class I-A or Class I-A-0 who is a delinquent may be selected and ordered to report for induction to fill an induction call for his specialist category notwithstanding the fact that he has not been mailed a Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62).

k. Section 1650.45 of Part 1650 is amended to read as follows:

§1650.45 Delivery and induction. The delivery and induction of special registrants, pursuant to calls for such registrants, shall be accomplished in the manner provided in Part 1632 of this chapter.
HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

September 25, 1951