Joseph R. Biden
February 10, 2021

Letter to Congressional Leaders on Blocking Property With Respect to the Situation in Burma
Dear Madam Speaker: (Dear Madam President:)
Pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701et seq.) (IEEPA), I hereby report that I have issued an Executive Order (the "order") declaring a national emergency with respect to the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States posed by the situation in Burma. The order responds to the February 1, 2021, coup in Burma by targeting the military and its leaders, their business interests, and their close family members. The order holds to account those responsible for unjustly arresting and detaining government leaders, politicians, human rights defenders, journalists, and religious leaders; rejecting the will of the people of Burma as expressed in elections held in November 2020; and undermining the country's democratic transition and the rule of law.
The order would authorize the blocking of property and interests in property of any foreign person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State:
In addition, the order suspends entry into the United States of any noncitizen determined to meet one or more of the above criteria.
I have delegated to the Secretary of the Treasury the authority, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the order. I have delegated to the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, the authority to implement the order as it applies to visas. I have delegated to the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Secretary of State, the authority to implement the order as it applies to the entry into the United States of noncitizens. All executive departments and agencies are directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of the order.
I am enclosing a copy of the Executive Order I have issued.
Sincerely,
JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR.
NOTE: Identical letters were sent to Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the House of Representatives, and Kamala D. Harris, President of the Senate. The letter was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on February 11. An original was not available for verification of the content of this letter.