Joseph R. Biden
October 31, 2021

Statement on Principles for Supply Chain Resilience
Today (October 31, 2021) the United States, the European Union, Australia, Canada, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germany, Indonesia, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Spain, and the United Kingdom met to discuss near-term supply chain disruptions and paths to long-term resilience. Secure, sustainable, and resilient global supply chains are foundational to our economic prosperity, national security, and collective interests. Countries expressed intent for working together to strengthen the resilience of our supply chains: the global ecosystem of raw materials, intermediate goods, manufacturing, logistics, research and development that ensures our businesses and consumers get the products they need. Secure, sustainable, and resilient supply chains require that we work in partnership, not only as governments, but with industry, unions and workers, civil society, and international organizations alike. Whether in responding to acute shocks of the kind we are experiencing in global trade today or addressing the chronic long-term challenges in sectors critical to our security, more resilient global supply chains are fundamental to sustainable economic development for all.
We discussed strengthening four key pillars of global supply chain resilience:
Transparency at the governmental level contributes to sharing information and insights into supply chain challenges, as well as helps government envisage measures that could improve our collective supply chains. Fostering greater supply chain transparency, compatible standards and information-sharing—consistent with domestic laws—among countries can further mitigate and respond to global supply chain shocks. In recognizing these principles, our countries express intent to cooperating to identify additional transparency measures and working collaboratively with the private sector on such measures. We also underscore the importance of transparency regarding government measures to strengthen supply chain resilience.
Diverse global suppliers not only promote resilience, they also foster interconnectedness and shared prosperity. We should avoid any unnecessary trade restrictions and maintain free flow of goods and services, consistent with the principles and objectives of the rules-based multilateral system, and work together to address existing restrictions affecting our collective supply chains. We should also foster competitive and dynamic supply chains that resist monopolization and offer alternate choices for materials, goods, and production and distribution. Diversity of supply also guards against acute economic vulnerability arising from concentrated control of a single source and protects every country's ability to make its own sovereign decisions and enable governments, industry, and the community to make their own choices about the sources and supply of goods.
Predictability is important to reliable supply chains, and we will work together to promote predictability in our trading relations as they impact our supply chains. We will reinforce and foster our longstanding economic partnership and supply chain relationships.
As partners in promoting secure and resilient supply chains, countries discussed working together and with the private sector to address critical supply chain challenges:
We welcome all economies that share these principles, companies, and non-governmental organizations to join us in pursuit of this shared vision for resilient supply chains, guided by these principles. Recognizing the need for the participation of industry, unions, workers and other stakeholders, we expressed interest in relevant ministers from our governments to convene an inclusive multistakeholder meeting on supply chain security and resilience in 2022.
NOTE: The statement was issued by the President in his capacity as Chair of the Global Summit on Supply Chain Resilience held on the margins of the Group of Twenty (G-20) nations summit in Rome, Italy.