Joseph R. Biden
September 01, 2021

Joint Statement by President Biden and President Volodmyr Zelenskiy of Ukraine on the United States-Ukraine Strategic Partnership
Thirty years after the restoration of Ukraine's independence, the bonds between the United States and Ukraine are stronger than ever. Our shared values and commitment to a Europe that is whole, free, democratic, and at peace provide the basis for our strategic partnership. We are working together to address shared global challenges, including energy security and diversification, climate change, and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our relationship serves as a cornerstone for security, democracy, and human rights in Ukraine and the broader region. We are committed to Ukraine's implementation of the deep and comprehensive reforms necessary to fulfill its European and Euro-Atlantic aspirations. We are also united in our commitment to Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity in the face of continued Russian aggression.
Ukraine's success is central to the global struggle between democracy and autocracy. As we face this challenge together, we stand shoulder-to-shoulder, optimistic about our ambitious common goals to advance democracy, deliver justice, enhance prosperity, and bolster security for Ukraine. Ukraine has achieved progress in building institutions with integrity and intends, with U.S. support, to continue to counter corruption, ensure accountability, safeguard human rights, realize the aspirations of its citizens, and create favorable conditions for attracting foreign direct investment and driving growth.
The United States and Ukraine are reinvigorating the Strategic Partnership Commission (SPC), reoriented and resourced to meet 21st century challenges. To memorialize the elevated status of our partnership, the U.S. Secretary of State and the Ukrainian Foreign Minister intend to approve a new Charter at the SPC's meeting in Washington this fall.
I. Security and Defense
In the 21st century, nations cannot be allowed to redraw borders by force. Russia violated this ground rule in Ukraine. Sovereign states have the right to make their own decisions and choose their own alliances. The United States stands with Ukraine and will continue to work to hold Russia accountable for its aggression. America's support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity is unwavering.








II. Democracy, Justice, and Human Rights
The United States and Ukraine are bound by the universal values that unite the free people of the world: democracy, human rights, the rule of law. We also recognize that living up to these values at home is essential to defending and advancing them around the world. Despite Russia's continuing aggression, Ukraine has made progress in implementing comprehensive democratic and human rights reforms. With U.S. support, Ukraine is pursuing a reform agenda to transform the country in line with European and Euro-Atlantic principles and practices.


III. Energy Security and Climate
The climate crisis has reached a critical point that demands urgent action, which we are both addressing. The United States and Ukraine are advancing Ukraine's energy security through sustainable, effective, and long-lasting policy solutions backed up by ongoing corporate governance reform.



IV. Economic Growth and Prosperity
Ukraine must be strong enough economically to choose its own future and to bend the arc of its national history toward greater justice and opportunity for the Ukrainian people. Ukraine's continued adoption and implementation of reforms are critical to ensuring that its economy delivers for the people.



V. Pandemic Response and Humanitarian Assistance
The United States has been a steadfast supporter of the Ukrainian people in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic and humanitarian needs resulting from the war in eastern Ukraine.

NOTE: The joint statement referred to Minister of Foreign Affairs Dmytro Kuleba of Ukraine. An original was not available for verification of the content of this joint statement.