Ulysses S. Grant
March 31, 1876

Veto Message
To the Senate of the United States:
For the reasons set forth in the accompanying communication from the Secretary of the Treasury, I have the honor to return herewith without my approval Senate bill No. 489, entitled "An act for the relief of G. B. Tyler and E. H. Luckett, assignees of William T. Cheatham."
U. S. GRANT.
TREASURY DEPARTMENT,March 30, 1876.
The PRESIDENT:
Referring to the letter of the 25th instant, written by your direction, transmitting Senate bill No. 489, "for the relief of G. B. Tyler and E. H. Luckett, assignees of William T. Cheatham," and requesting my opinion as to the propriety of its approval by you, I have to say that there are no data on file in the Department, so far as I can learn, which indicate that the amount it is proposed by this bill to refund to the assignees of Mr. Cheatham was wrongfully collected or that the amount should be refunded.
The Commissioner of Internal Revenue, in his report to me in reference to the matter, says:
"The reimbursement to the United States by said Cheatham of the salary paid to this storekeeper by the collector of internal revenue for the months of December, 1869, and January, 1870, was in accordance with the provisions of joint resolution of March 29, 1869 (16 U. S. Statutes at Large, p. 52), and there appears to be no reason for the refunding by the United States to the assignees of said Cheatham the salary of this storekeeper that would not apply with equal force to similar payments by all other distillers who were operating their distilleries or had spirits in their warehouses at that time."
The facts above stated are considered by this office valid and serious objections to the approval of this bill, and they would have been communicated to the Congressional committee before the passage of the bill had they called the attention of this office to the subject.
The bill is herewith returned.
I have the honor to be, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
B. H. BRISTOW,
Secretary.