Theodore Roosevelt
May 02, 1904

Proclamation 523—Reserving Certain Lands Within the Hailey Land District

Whereas,under the provisions of the Reclamation Act approved June 17, 1902--31 Stat., 388--the Secretary of the Interior, by Departmental order dated November 17, 1902, withdrew from entry, except under the homestead law, the following described tracts of land, among others, in the Hailey land district, Idaho:
In township nine south, range twenty-four east, Boise Meridian.
The south-east quarter, the south half of north-east quarter, the east half of south-west quarter, and the south-east quarter of north-west quarter, all in section one;
The south half of south-east quarter, of section twenty; and
The north-east quarter, the east half of north-west quarter, of section twenty-nine.
In township ten south, range twenty-three east, B. M.
The north-east quarter, the north-west quarter, the south-west quarter, and the west half of south-east quarter, of section fifteen;
The south-east quarter of north-east quarter, and lots six and seven, of section sixteen, and
Lots three and four, of section twenty-two;
And Whereas,by Departmental order dated April 26, 1904, the said order of withdrawal of said lands was vacated, and they were at once temporarily withdrawn from all entry whatever for the purpose of securing their subsequent reservation for townsite purposes under sections 2380 and 2381 of the Revised Statutes of the United States;
And Whereas,the Director of the United States Geological Survey, by letter dated April 15, 1904, has represented that said lands have been found suitable for townsite purposes along the line of a proposed railroad which may be extended through large tracts of land to be irrigated under the operation of said Reclamation Act, and will thereby become centers of population and necessary to the proper development of the project;
And Whereas,the Secretary of the Interior, under date of April 30, 1904, has requested that said lands be reserved for townsites to be created under existing statute;
Now, Therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt,President of the United States, by virtue of the power in me vested by sections 2380 and 2381 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, do hereby declare and make known that said lands are hereby reserved for occupation as town-sites, to be disposed of by the United States under the terms of the statutes applicable thereto.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.
Doneat the city of Washington this 2nd day of May in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and four, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and twenty-eighth.


THEODORE ROOSEVELT.
By the President:
FRANCIS B. LOOMIS,
Acting Secretary of State.