Ronald Reagan
April 22, 1985

Proclamation 5325—Asian/Pacific American Heritage Week, 1985

The Pacific Ocean today is ringed by a large number of successful developed and developing nations. So rapid has the progress of this area been that many scholars are beginning to speak of an emerging Pacific Civilization similar to the Mediterranean Civilization of the ancient world or the Atlantic Civilization of modern times. America is well-placed to play a major role in this emerging civilization not only because of its geographic position but also because many of its citizens are themselves of Asian and Pacific ancestry.
Americans of Asian and Pacific ancestry are a diverse group, representing as many different ethnic allegiances as Americans of European ancestry, but certain common values characterize them all. Whether as immigrants to our country or as native inhabitants in the islands of the Pacific Ocean, they have retained a strong sense of traditional values emphasizing vital family and communal bonds. These values remain strong today and play an important role in the success achieved by these proud Americans.
Asian and Pacific Americans have been successful in virtually every field of endeavor. Through their achievements in many areas, they have enriched the lives of all Americans. By sharing their cultures with other Americans, they have increased our Nation's rich cultural vitality. Asian and Pacific Americans have truly helped the United States to fulfill its most cherished ideals.
Now, Therefore, I, Ronald Reagan,President of the United States of America, do hereby proclaim the week beginning May 5, 1985, as Asian/Pacific American Heritage Week and call upon all Americans to observe this week with appropriate ceremonies and activities.
In Witness Whereof I have hereunto set my hand this twenty-second day of April, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-five, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and ninth.


RONALD REAGAN
Note: The proclamation was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on April 23.