Ronald Reagan
January 20, 1981

Letter to the Speaker of the House and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate on the Inspector General Appointees of the Department of Energy 
Re: Notification Pursuant to Public Law 95-91

Dear Mr. Speaker: (Dear Mr. President:)
This is to advise the House of Representatives that I have today exercised my power as President to remove from office the current appointees to the position of Inspector General and Deputy Inspector General for the Department of Energy. The removed appointees may be involved in investigations which would be aided by some continued association with their offices. We will want to review these situations to consider asking them to continue their participation on an appropriate basis.
Uncovering fraud, waste and mismanagement of federal funds as well as the promotion of economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the administration of federal programs and operations will be an important priority in my Administration. The Inspector General and Deputy Inspector General of the Department of Energy will have critical roles in the achievement of this objective. As is the case with regard to all positions where I, as President, have the power of appointment by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, it is vital that I have the fullest confidence in the ability, integrity and commitment of the appointees to the position of Inspector General and Deputy Inspector General of the Department of Energy.
I will be submitting to the Senate in the near future my nomination of an individual for each of these positions who has my confidence and who meets the appropriate qualifications. If these individuals wish to be considered for reappointment, they may indicate their interest and they will be judged in competition with other applicants.

Sincerely,
RONALD REAGAN
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of Representatives, and Strom Thurmond, President pro tempore of the Senate.
The letter was announced by the Office of the Press Secretary on January 21.