Ronald Reagan
September 27, 1983

Remarks of President Reagan and President Mauno Koivisto of Finland Following Their Meetings 
President Reagan. President Koivisto and I have just completed a cordial and fruitful discussion about relations between Finland and the United States and at, out the current international situation. And it's a pleasure to say that we did not discuss problems in the Finnish-American relationship, because there are no bilateral problems between Finland and the United States. Our relations are excellent and have been for a long time.
The United States supports Finland's position of internationally recognized neutrality, and we value their perspective on world problems.
I welcome this chance to hear President Koivisto's views and expressed our own commitment to international cooperation and world peace. Americans have always had a warm place in their hearts for the Finnish people, and it's been a pleasure to welcome their President to our country today. Thank you, and thank you, sir, for being here.
President Koivisto. I appreciate very much this opportunity to meet with President Reagan here in Washington today. It confirms a longstanding tradition of good relations and personal contacts, both warm and friendly, between our two countries.
Our talks have given me a very ample opportunity to gain insights into the policies of the United States. Naturally, I have also expressed our own views and aspirations with regard to the international situation. Finland's foreign policy is based, in the first place, on good relations and confidence with regard to our neighboring countries. In accordance with our policy on neutrality, we want to have good relations with all nations of the world.
Finland's impact on world affairs is understandably limited. However, we remain determined to make whatever contribution we can to restrain international conflicts and promote peaceful solutions.
Finland recognizes with deep appreciation the friendship she has always received from the people of the United States, for whom we have the greatest respect and affection.
Note: President Reagan spoke at 1:06 p.m. to reporters assembled at the South Portico of the White House.
Earlier, the two Presidents met privately in the Oval Office and held a working luncheon, together with U.S. and Finnish officials, in the State Dining Room.