Jimmy Carter
August 18, 1979

Labor Dispute in the Grain Industry Telegram to Industry and Union Leaders. 
It is apparent that the current work stoppage between the American Federation of Grain Millers and the eight grain facilities in Duluth, Minn., and Superior, Wis., is having an increasingly severe impact upon the general economy and public welfare of this geographical area as well as seriously threatening the many thousands of farmers who are now into their annual harvest with no means to ship their grain.
It is my deep concern therefore that every effort be made to bring an immediate end to this dispute.
In this regard, I am directing Wayne L. Horvitz, the national director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, to become personally involved and to provide whatever assistance he deems necessary.
In this endeavor, a meeting has been scheduled for Tuesday, August 21, 1979, commencing at 2 p.m. at the offices of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service in Minneapolis, Minn.
I am confident that you will participate in these meetings recognizing not only your own personal concerns, but also your responsibility to the interests of those being adversely affected by this unfortunate dispute.
This will require a total commitment by you to continue bargaining until an all-out exhaustive effort has brought about an end to this strike.
JIMMY CARTER
Note: This is the text of identical telegrams addressed to E. H. Ryan, Peavey Co., Minneapolis, Minn.; Anthony Corvino, Continental Grain Co., New York, N.Y.; Gerald Mattson, International Multifoods, Minneapolis; Felix Ricco, Cargill Co., Wayzata, Minn.; Donald Friborg, General Mills, Minneapolis; Harold Schuler, Con-agra, Omaha, Nebr.; Douglas Larson, Farmers Union GTA, St. Paul, Minn.; Dale Benson, Archer-Daniel-Midlands, Decatur, Ill.; Joseph Devich, American Federation of Grain Millers, Superior, Wis.; Frank Hoese, American Federation of Grain Millers, Minneapolis; and Mike Miller, American Federation of Grain Millers, Minneapolis. Copies of the telegram were also sent to David Roe, president, Minnesota AFL-CIO, St. Paul; and John Schmitt, president, Wisconsin AFL-CIO, Milwaukee.
The text of the telegram was released at Bloomington, Minn.