Jimmy Carter
July 30, 1980

United States Summer Olympic Team Remarks at a White House Reception to Members of the Team. 
If I could have everybody's attention for just a moment, the first thing I would like to do is to ask Mr. Walter Haas, who's head of Levi Strauss, to come up here so everybody can thank him for his generosity-Is he here?—and also Mrs. Haas. While they are coming up, I would like to say that the uniforms they've given out are just beautiful.
All of you are standing in front of one of the world's symbols of freedom and democracy, and that's our White House, on my left. Every President of this Nation has lived here except George Washington, and it was built before the second President left office.
All of you are part of a great team, assembled here together, but we know that your achievements in the past, present, and future are because of your own individual courage, commitment, and initiative. You'll be going from here to compete in international competition in the future. I know, because of your own excellence and commitment, that you'll do well and continue to represent our Nation in the finest possible way.
I want to say again that this has been a day of opportunity for me, as President of our great Nation, and for the Members of Congress, representing the legislative branch, to pay our tribute to you on behalf of more than 220 million Americans, who share with you a deep commitment to individuality, to freedom, to personal achievement, and to liberty not only for ourselves but for others around the world.
You have honored me by letting me shake your hand, and you have honored the White House and all it stands for by representing our Nation so well. God bless you. I love every one of you.
Thank you very much.
Here's Mr. Haas, who's been so nice to all of you. And I think you might want to just express your pleasure and your thanks to him.
Rosalynn asked me to announce that the White House is open, if you'd like to visit it. In the meantime, of course, we have refreshments and things for you and your parents and your friends.
Thank you very much.
If the employees of Levi Strauss would come to the stage, we'd like to see you just a moment. The employees of Levi Strauss, who came into Washington to help with the fittings of the uniforms and the clothing-if you'd just come to the stage for a moment, we'd appreciate it.
Note: The President spoke at 5:46 p.m. on the South Lawn of the White House.
Later in the evening, the President and Mrs. Garter attended a benefit at the Kennedy Center for the athletes. Commission on Presidential Scholars Appointment of Four Members. July 31, 1900
The President today announced the appointment of four persons as members of the Commission on Presidential Scholars. They are:
BEVERLY JOYCE BIMES, of St. Louis, Mo., an English teacher at Hazelwood East High School, who was named Teacher of the Year for 1980.
FRANCES SNOW LEE, of Wichita, Kans., who is currently in a masters degree program in education at Wichita State University. She was a television teacher and production supervisor of "Romper Room School" on KAKE television for 12 years and is active in civic affairs.
SCOTT D. THOMSON, of Reston, Va., executive director of the National Association of Secondary School Principals, who has also served as superintendent of a school district and as a university lecturer in school administration.
RAFAEL RIVERA GARCIA, director of the Office of Cultural Affairs, La Fortaleza, San Juan, Puerto Rico, and a former assistant director of the University of Puerto Rico Museum. National Commission on Libraries and Information
Science Nomination of Three Members and Designation of Chairman. July 31, 1900
The President today announced that he will nominate three persons to be members of the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science. They are:
CHARLES W. BENTON, of Evanston, Ill., chairman and chief executive officer of Films, Inc., a subsidiary of Encyclopaedia Britannica Films which distributes 16-millimeter films, and president of Public Media, Inc. (reappointment). On confirmation by the Senate, Benton will be redesignated Chairman.
GORDON M. AMBACH, of Newtonville, N.Y., president of the University of the State of New York and commissioner of education.
PAULETTE H. HOLAHAN, of New Orleans, La., chairman of the board of directors of the New Orleans Public Library, a member of the Louisiana State Library Commission and the board of directors of the National Urban Libraries Council, and national vice president of the American Library Trustee Association. Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Nomination of Five Members of the Board of Regents. July 31, 1900
The President today announced that he will nominate five persons to be members of the Board of Regents of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences. They are:
LAURO F. CAVAZOS, president of Texas Tech University, former dean and professor of anatomy at Tufts University School of Medicine;
ROBERT H. EBERT, president of the Milbank Memorial Fund, former dean of Harvard Medical School, and president of the Harvard Medical Center;
EUGENE M. FARBER, of Portola Valley, Calif., professor of dermatology and chairman of the department of dermatology at Stanford University School of Medicine;
CARO E. LUHRS, of Washington, D.C., a private practitioner of medicine, owner of a health care consulting firm, and former medical adviser to the Secretary of Agriculture;
WILLIAM R. Roy, of Topeka, Kans., a private practitioner in obstetrics and gynecology, former Member of Congress, and a member of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences.