Jimmy Carter
May 29, 1980

Columbus, Ohio Remarks at a Carter/Mondale Campaign Rally. 
Senator John Glenn, Commissioner Mike Dorrian, Dean Jeffers, ladies and gentlemen, my fellow Americans:
It is overwhelming to see this crowd here today. I've been waiting a long time for this moment. And there is no place in the world I would rather be right now than Columbus, Ohio, because there's no place that's any better to speak to the heart of America than right here in the heart of America. And I have to admit there are some other reasons that I'm glad to be here. [Laughter]
My final victory in the primary season in 1976 in Ohio convinced the Nation that I would win the nomination of the Democratic Party, and I want to thank Ohioans for that. Secondly, at the 1976 convention in New York, the delegate votes of Ohio put me over the top as the Democratic nominee. I want to thank you for that. And on election day in the fall of 1976, the votes in Ohio made the difference between another 4 years of Republicanism and the return of a Democrat to the White House, and I and the rest of the American people want to thank you for that.
And next Tuesday, Ohio will make a decision that will give me a nationwide majority of the Democratic delegates again, and I want to thank you for that in advance.

It is good to be back, and I could not ask for a better man to introduce me and to welcome me back—a bolder pioneer, a finer statesman, a great son of Ohio—than Senator John Glenn.
In the fall of 1944, when President Roosevelt was running for reelection, he said that he would not campaign, but he would take the occasion to correct any errors that his opponents made about him and his administration and his record. Although I will, of course, campaign this fall, now is a good time to set the record straight, not only about my own record but also about the strengths and the achievements of the United States of America.
Let me ask you a few questions. The answers might surprise you. Of all of the industrial powers, which nation has the highest productivity per worker? The United States is the answer. Another one: Of the major developed nations on Earth, which one was the only nation to meet our goal of reducing oil consumption by 5 percent in 1979, compared to 1978? Which nation did that? The answer is the United States. And during the 5 years since OPEC declared its oil embargo in 1973, among the major oil-consuming nations-our country, West Germany, France, Great Britain, Japan—listen closely to the question—which is the only nation to have a net increase in manufacturing employment? The answer is the United States, right.
Another question: During this exact same period, the same countries, which of these nations had the greatest increase in industrial production? Anybody know? You're right: the United States of America. Here's one you could probably answer just as well: Which nation has added in the last 3 1/2 years more than 9 million new jobs? The United States, again. And I might say that 350,000 of those jobs was right here in Ohio. Which nation is the strongest and at peace? The United States. And which nation is going to stay the strongest and stay at peace? The United States.
I'm here today to talk sense to the people of Ohio and to the people of the United States of America. It is time to set the record straight about our Nation and about our future. We do live in a time of challenge; we do live in a time of change; we do live in a time of danger. But in every area of change, in every area of challenge, in every area of danger, because of our courage and strength, America is turning the tide.
We're turning the tide in energy from a nation which has been overly dependent on foreign oil to a nation which is determined to be energy secure. We're turning the tide on the economy from a nation suffering along with other nations of worldwide inflation and from escalating interest rates to a nation determined to bring inflation under control. And we're turning the tide in foreign policy as well from a nation which was paralyzed by a tragic Asian war and by a scandal at home to a nation which is determined to meet the challenge of the future no matter what it brings to keep the peace and a nation that's proud of protecting the principles on which our very lives are based.
First, let me tell you how we are turning the tide on foreign policy. For years, Americans were divided. We were unsure of our purpose in the world. But today we are united not only in defending our Nation but in defending the principles on which we stand. We're united in the determination that America must be strong; strong militarily, strong economically, and strong morally. And today, the people of the United States are not ashamed to say that we are proud and that we love our country.

We've got some challenges ahead of us, there's no doubt about that. And I want to describe very briefly to you some of those challenges and what we have done and are doing to meet them.
For more than 15 years, as John Glenn well knows, the Soviet Union maintained a steady upward growth in its military strength, while our own Nation failed to meet this challenge adequately. Now the United States is leading its allies in a steady, sustained growth in defense expenditures, not just for the last 3 years but with a commitment to the next 5 years and beyond. We have turned the tide in military strength. As long as I'm President, our Nation will be ready and determined to use our great strength for peace, for peace, to stand up for security, to stand up for our people, and to stand up for our unchanging principles.
As a world leader—and that's what we are—as a superpower—and that's what we are—we are meeting aggression and terrorism with peaceful means. When possible, we meet these challenges with other nations at our side. But I can tell you that on occasion, if necessary, to meet those challenges of aggression and terrorism, we will stand alone if necessary.
Over the most difficult possible obstacles and with great predictions that we would fail, we are now turning the tide on energy. For years our Nation was more and more a captive of the oil-producing nations. Each year we imported more and more oil. Each year more of our wealth flowed out of our country to buy that oil. We paid a great price for this, and we are still paying that price. As we send billions of dollars overseas to pay for foreign oil, we import inflation, and we also import unemployment. We allow our Nation to become dependent on the undependable and addicted to the unaffordable.
To cut oil imports, we must do two things: We must produce more energy in America, and we must conserve energy. Last year in this country, we cut gasoline consumption by more than 5 percent. So far this year, we have cut oil imports by 12 percent. That comes to a reduction of 1 million barrels of oil per day. Under new legislation—and I want to thank you for what you've done for that—under new legislation passed by the Congress with John Glenn's help, we are at long last moving in the right direction.
Now, for the first time in our Nation's history, we will have a national energy program to put us on the road to energy security. It's more ambitious than the space program, the Marshall plan, and the Interstate Highway System combined. It will replace foreign oil with American ingenuity and with Ohio coal. And it will take billions of dollars that now go to foreign countries to pay for their oil to create new energy sources and new American jobs here at home. This will be an exciting and a challenging time for all of us.
We're also turning the tide on the economy. The biggest single cause of our economic problems is energy. As long as we send those billions of dollars overseas to pay for foreign oil, we hurt ourselves, as I've said, in two ways: first, through inflation, because inflated oil prices go all the way through our economy and all the way through our land; and second, through unemployment, because the more money we send abroad, the less we have to invest and to spend at home to increase further the productivity of American workers.
High interest rates, as you well know, have hit the automobile and the homebuilding industries a severe blow. We are facing up to these economic problems. We have moved strongly on a broad-based front since the second week in March with an anti-inflation program, which is very successful, to cut interest rates and inflation. The results speak for themselves. Interest rates are now moving down rapidly; the inflation rate is also beginning to come down. And I tell you flatly, with the perfect knowledge that if I make a mistake it's going to hurt me, I make this prediction: that the second half of this year, beginning in the summer, the inflation rate is going to go down too, and you can count on it.
For the first time in 12 years we are working to balance the Federal budget. But we must do it right, with fairness and with compassion. Within the context of a strong defense and a balanced budget, we are fighting right now, today, in Congress, to meet the recession that's impending with expanded Federal assisted housing, with new job programs for young people, and aid to distressed urban areas. Because we have taken the right steps, we are building a brighter economic future for our country, a future of stable economic growth and of self-reliance and a better life for all those who live in our great land.
In each area—in foreign policy, in energy, and in the economy—there are no easy answers. We face major challenges, but we are turning the tide. We are demonstrating what we can accomplish by what we have accomplished already, with your help. In every area of challenge, I'm convinced that America can finish the job. I'm convinced of that because I know what we have already done together.
Our Nation has acted with firmness and with determination against aggression in Afghanistan; against terrorism in Iran; against dangerous reliance on foreign oil; against inflationary government spending. And we've acted together as a nation also for peace here at home and in the Middle East; for human rights at home and abroad; for a strong defense; and for the dignity of our senior citizens, our minority groups, our young people, and for all working men and women.
I'm not here to say that all my decisions have been right or popular. I know that they have certainly not all been easy ones. But I will say this: In the last 3 1/2 years we have been tested under fire. We have never ducked nor hidden. We've tackled long-term problems that have been with us and overlooked or deliberately ignored for years. We've made tough decisions, and we've taken the heat when we made those decisions. But we've done what was right, and we've always told the truth.
As long as I'm President, and as long as Fritz Mondale is Vice President, that's something you can count on, the truth. We will always talk sense; we will always give it to you straight. And also as long as I'm President, the Government of the United States will be committed to those fundamental principles that hold our ever-stronger Nation together; freedom, democracy, compassion, and human rights. We'll remain committed to the full promise of America—the land of equal justice, the land of full opportunity, and the land of liberty for all Americans.
Thank you very much. God bless you all.
Note: The President spoke at 12:36 p.m. at the Nationwide Insurance Company Plaza. In his opening remarks, he referred to Dean Jeffers, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of the Nationwide Insurance Company.