Barack Obama
April 04, 2011

Letter to Congressional Leaders Transmitting a Report Related to Afghanistan and Pakistan
Dear __________:
In response to section 1117 of the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2009 (Public Law 111-32, the "Act"), and in order to keep the Congress fully informed, I am providing the attached report related to Afghanistan and Pakistan. This is the third report submitted under section 1117 of the Act and follows my September 2010 submission.
This report covers the period from July 1, 2010, through December 31, 2010, and provides an update on our assessment since that date. In December, my Administration completed a thorough review of our progress against our core policy objectives in Afghanistan and Pakistan during 2010. The 2010 Afghanistan-Pakistan Annual Review also included an evaluation of the progress made during the period of this report, which marked the full deployment of the U.S. troop "surge" to Afghanistan that I announced in December 2009.
Sincerely,


Barack Obama
Note: Identical letters were sent to Vice President Joseph R. Biden, Jr., President of the Senate; Senate Majority Leader Harry M. Reid; Senate Minority Leader A. Mitchell McConnell; Daniel K. Inouye, chairman, and W. Thad Cochran, vice chairman, Senate Committee on Appropriations; Carl M. Levin, chairman, and John S. McCain III, ranking member, Senate Committee on Armed Services; John F. Kerry, chairman, and Richard G. Lugar, ranking member, Senate committee on Foreign Relations; Joseph I. Lieberman, chairman, and Susan M. Collins, ranking member, Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs; Patrick J. Leahy, chairman, and Charles E. Grassley, ranking member, Senate Committee on the Judiciary; Dianne Feinstein, chair, and C. Saxby Chambliss, vice chairman, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence; Speaker of the House of Representatives John A. Boehner; House Majority Leader Eric I. Cantor; House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi; Harold D. Rogers, chairman, and Norman D. Dicks, ranking member, House Committee on Appropriations; Howard P. "Buck" McKeon, chairman, and Adam Smith, ranking member, House Committee on Armed Services; Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, chair, and Howard L. Berman, ranking member, House Committee on Foreign Affairs; Peter T. King, chairman, and Bennie G. Thompson, ranking member, House Committee on Homeland Security; Lamar S. Smith, chairman, and John J. Conyers, Jr., ranking member, House Committee on the Judiciary; and Michael J. Rogers, chairman, and C.A. "Dutch" Ruppersberger, ranking member, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. This letter was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on April 5.