Barack Obama
November 29, 2013

Letter to Congressional Leaders on the Implementation Plan for the Whole-of-Government Vision Prescribed in the 2010 National Security Strategy
Dear __________:
In my National Security Strategy of 2010, I addressed how the United States would strengthen its global leadership position; end the war in Iraq; disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qa'ida; and achieve economic recovery at home and abroad. The Strategy recognized that we faced a world in transition; that we needed to reposition the United States to shape that transition effectively to meet our interests, and that, to be effective, a whole-of-government approach was necessary. The National Defense Authorization Act of 2012, section 1072, reinforced the importance of whole-of-government integration in this effort. In accordance with section 1072, I provided an implementation plan in September 2012 detailing our work to date to advance the whole-of-government effort.
I am writing to inform you of my intent to release a new National Security Strategy in early 2014. The new Strategy will update the vision I provided in 2010 and describe my Administration's national security priorities for the remainder of my term. Accordingly, we will submit a broader update on the whole-of-government implementation plan in the spring to reflect this new Strategy.
Sincerely,
BARACK OBAMA
NOTE: Identical letters were sent to Barbara A. Mikulski, chairman, and Richard C. Shelby , ranking member, Senate Committee on Appropriations; Carl M. Levin, chairman, and James M. Inhofe, ranking member, Senate Committee on Armed Services; Patricia L. Murray, chairman, and Jefferson B. Sessions III, ranking member, Senate Committee on the Budget; Robert Menendez, chairman, and Robert P. Corker, Jr., ranking member, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations; Thomas R. Carper, chairman, and Thomas A. Coburn, ranking member, Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs; Dianne Feinstein, chairman, and C. Saxby Chambliss, vice chairman, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence; Patrick J. Leahy, chairman, and Charles E. Grassley, ranking member, Senate Committee on the Judiciary; Harold D. Rogers, chairman, and Nita M. Lowey, ranking member, House Committee on Appropriations; Howard P. "Buck" McKeon, chairman, and Adam Smith, ranking member, House Committee on Armed Services; Paul D. Ryan, chairman, and Christopher Van Hollen, Jr., ranking member, House Committee on the Budget; Edward R. Royce, chairman, and Eliot L. Engel, ranking member, House Committee on Foreign Affairs; Michael T. McCaul, chairman, and Bennie G. Thompson, ranking member, House Committee on Homeland Security; Michael J. Rogers, chairman, and Charles A. "Dutch" Ruppersberger, ranking member, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence; Robert W. Goodlatte, chairman, John J. Conyers, Jr., ranking member, House Committee on the Judiciary; and Darrell E. Issa, chairman, Elijah E. Cummings, ranking member, House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.