Barack Obama
September 22, 2016

Letter to Congressional Leaders Transmitting a Report on the Accession of Montenegro to the North Atlantic Treaty
Dear Mr. Chairman: (Dear Senator:) (Dear Representative:)
Pursuant to section 3(2)(E)(i) of the Resolution of Ratification to the Protocols to the North Atlantic Treaty of 1949 on the Accession of Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic adopted on April 30, 1998, I am pleased to submit the enclosed report.
In doing so, I reiterate my appreciation for efforts to work with me in advancing a Europe whole, free, and at peace.
As provided in the Resolution, the enclosed report includes:
(I) An evaluation of how Montenegro will further the principles of the North Atlantic Treaty and contribute to the security of the North Atlantic area;
(II) An evaluation of the eligibility of Montenegro for membership based on the principles and criteria identified by NATO and the United States, including the military readiness of the country;
(III) An explanation of how an invitation to Montenegro would affect the national security interests of the United States;
(IV) A United States Government analysis of the common-funded military requirements and costs associated with integrating Montenegro into NATO and an analysis of the shares of those costs to be borne by NATO members, including the United States;
(V) A preliminary analysis of the implications for the United States defense budget and other United States budgets of integrating Montenegro into NATO; and
(VI) An analysis of Montenegro's ability to meet the full range of the financial burdens of NATO membership, and the likely impact upon the military effectiveness of NATO of Montenegro, if Montenegro were to be admitted to NATO.
This report is in both classified and unclassified forms, as provided in the Resolution.
Sincerely,


BARACK OBAMA
NOTE: Identical letters were sent to W. Thad Cochran, chairman, and Barbara A. Mikulski, ranking member, Senate Committee on Appropriations; John S. McCain III, chairman, and John F. Reed, ranking member, Senate Committee on Armed Services; Robert P. Corker, Jr., chairman, and Benjamin L. Cardin, ranking member, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations; Harold D. Rogers, chairman, and Nita M. Lowey, ranking member, House Committee on Appropriations; William "Mac" Thornberry, chairman, and D. Adam Smith, ranking member, House Committee on Armed Services; and Edward R. Royce, chairman, and Eliot L. Engel, ranking member, House Committee on Foreign Affairs.