Woodrow Wilson
February 28, 1920

Proclamation 1558—Authorizing the Director General of Railroads to Continue Certain Duties Regarding the Railroads Vested in the President
By the President of the United States of America
A Proclamation
Whereasthe Act approved February 28th, 1920, entitled "An Act to provide for the termination of Federal control of railroads and systems of transportation; to provide for the settlement of disputes between carriers and their employees; to further amend an Act entitled ‘An Act to regulate commerce', approved February 4, 1887, as amended, and for other purposes", contains certain provisions with reference to the termination of Federal control of railroads and systems of transportation, and
WhereasSection 211 of said Act is as follows:
Sec. 211. All powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the President by the preceding sections of this Act, except the designation of the agent under section 206, may be executed by him through such agency or agencies as he may determine.
Now, Therefore, I, Woodrow Wilson,President of the United States, under and by virtue of the power and authority so vested in me by said Act, and of all other powers me hereto enabling, do hereby designate and appoint Walker D. Hines, Director General of Railroads, or his successor in office, either personally or through such divisions, agencies or persons as he may appoint, to exercise and perform all and singular the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon me by the provisions of said Act of February 28th, 1920, except the designation of the agent under Section 206 thereof; and hereby confirm and continue in him, and his successors in office, all powers and authority heretofore delegated under) the Federal Control Act, approved March 21, 1918, except as such powers and authority have been limited in the said Act of February 28th, 1920.
The said Walker D. Hines, Director General of Railroads, or his successor in office, is hereby authorized and directed, until otherwise provided by proclamation of the President or by Act of Congress, to do and perform as fully in all respects as the President is authorized to do all and singular the acts and things necessary or proper in order to carry into effect the provisions of this proclamation, the provisions of said Act of February 28th, 1920, and the unrepealed provisions of the said Federal Control Act of March 21, 1918.
In witness whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States to be affixed.
Doneby the President in the District of Columbia this 28th day of February, in the year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Twenty, and of the Independence of the United States the One Hundred and Forty-Fourth.
WOODROW WILSON
By the President:
Frank L. Polk,Acting Secretary of State