Woodrow Wilson
November 21, 1913

Proclamation 1258—Rules for the Measurement of Vessels for the Panama Canal

I, Woodrow Wilson,President of the United States of America, by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by the Act of Congress, approved August twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and twelve, to provide for the opening, maintenance, protection and operation of the Panama Canal and the sanitation and government of the Canal Zone, do hereby prescribe and proclaim the "Rules for the Measurement of Vessels for the Panama Canal," which are annexed hereto and made a part of this proclamation.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.
Doneat the city of Washington this twenty-first day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and thirteen and of the independence of the United States the one hundred and thirty-eighth.


WOODROW WILSON
By the President:

W. J. Bryan

Secretary of State.

RULES FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF VESSELS FOR THE PANAMA CANAL

Article I. All vessels, American and foreign, except warships, including vessels of commerce and Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships, applying for passage through the Panama Canal shall present a duly authenticated certificate stating the vessel's gross and net tonnage as determined by these rules. Vessels of commerce, Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships, without such certificate shall before passing through the canal, or before being allowed to clear therefrom, be measured, and shall have their gross and net tonnage determined in accordance with these rules.
All warships, American and foreign, other than transports, colliers, supply and hospital ships, shall present duly authenticated displacement scale and curves stating accurately the tonnage of displacement at each possible mean draft.

It is to be understood that "supply ships" shall include Army and Navy ammunition ships, refrigerator ships, distilling ships, repair ships submarine tenders, and destroyer tenders, as well as Army and Navy vessels used to transport general Army and Navy supplies; and that "colliers" shall include Army and Navy vessels used to transport coal or fuel oil.


Art. II. Gross tonnage as determined by these rules shall express the total capacity of vessels, i.e., the exact cubical contents of all spaces below the upper deck and of all permanently covered and closed-in spaces on or above that deck, excepting such spaces as may be hereinafter permitted as exemptions from measurement. Gross tonnage shall include not only all permanently covered and closed-in spaces which are or may be used for stowing cargo and stores or for providing shelter and other comfort for passengers or crew, but also such spaces as are used, or are intended to be used, in navigating and serving the vessel.
Only such spaces as are specifically mentioned in Article IV, below, shall be exempted from measurement. All other spaces shall be considered as closed-in and shall be included in gross tonnage.

Art. III. By permanently covered and closed-in spaces on or above the upper deck are to be understood all those which are separated off by decks or coverings, or fixed partitions, and which, therefore, represent an increase of capacity that is or may be used for the stowage of cargo, or for the berthing and accommodation of the passengers, the officers, or the crew. No break in a deck, nor any opening or openings in a deck or the covering of a space or in the partitions or walls of a space, nor the absence of a partition shall prevent a space from being measured and comprised in gross tonnage if the opening or openings in the deck, partition, or side wall can be closed in, or if the absent partition can be put in place, after admeasurement and the spaces thus closed in be thereby better fitted for the transport of goods or passengers.
In the case of a vessel having a trunk or "turret", the deck forming the covering of the trunk or turret shall be considered the upper deck, and all spaces below that deck within the trunk or turret shall be considered as covered and closed-in. The space within the turret or trunk shall be measured as are other between-deck spaces.
Spaces considered as "permanently closed-in" and spaces permitted to be exempted from measurement shall be determined solely by the provisions contained in these rules, and not by any definitions or provisions contained in the measurement rules or regulations of any country.

Art. IV. The following spaces shall be exempted from measurement and shall not be included in the gross tonnage, and no other spaces shall be exempted:

[Figures 1 through 11]


Art. V. Should a vessel at any time stow cargo of any kind, bunker coal or other fuel, or stores of any description in any portion whatever of any exempted space, except spaces exempted under Art. IV, Sec. 1, Par. (b) and spaces on open decks not permanently covered, or upon decks as defined in Art. IV, Sec. 1, Par. (a), of these rules, the whole of that space shall be measured and added to the gross tonnage, and the space shall not thereafter be exempted from measurement.

Art. VI. Spaces for the use or possible use of passengers shall not be exempted from measurement except as stated in Article IV, section 1, paragraph (a).
In case of Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships as defined in Article I, the term "passengers" shall include all officers, enlisted men, and other persons who are not assigned to duty and who are not duly inscribed on the ship's rolls.

Art. VII. If any ship carries stores, timber, cattle, or other cargo in any space upon an open deck not permanently covered or in spaces exempted under Art. IV, Sec. 1, Pars, (a) and (b) of these rules, all tolls and other charges payable on the vessel's net tonnage shall be payable upon the vessel's net tonnage (as defined below in Articles X and XII) increased by the tonnage of the space occupied (at the time at which the tolls or other charges become payable) by the goods carried upon deck and not permanently covered or closed-in. The deck space occupied by the goods thus carried shall be determined at the time of the application of the vessel for passage through the canal and shall be deemed to be the space limited by the area occupied by the goods and by straight lines inclosing a rectangular space sufficient to include the goods. The tonnage of the space occupied by the goods shall be ascertained in the manner prescribed below by Article IX, Rule I, for the measurement of poops or other closed-in spaces.
Nothing in this article shall in any manner affect the provisions of Articles II, III, and IV.

Art. VIII. The cubical contents of the spaces included, by these rules, in gross tonnage may, in any country where the Moorsom system of measurement has been adopted, be ascertained under that system as applied in measuring vessels for national registry, provided that system is substantially similar to the Moorsom system of measurement as set forth in Article IX of these rules.

Art. IX. In countries that have not adopted the Moorsom system of measuring spaces within vessels, the cubical contents of any of the spaces included in gross tonnage shall be ascertained according to the Moorsom system as set forth in the following rules: Rule I for the measurement of empty vessels; Rule II for laden vessels; Rule III for open vessels.

Measure the length of the ship in a straight line along the upper side of the tonnage deck from the inside of the inner plank (average thickness) at the side of the stem to the inside of the midship stern timber or plank there, as the case may be (average thickness), deducting from this length what is due to the rake of the bow in the thickness of the deck and what is due to the rake of the stern timber in the thickness of the deck, and also what is due to the rake of the stern timber in one-third of the round of the beam; divide the length so taken into the number of equal parts required by the following table, according to the class in such table to which the ship belongs:



Art. X. The following spaces (enumerated below in secs. 1 to 10 of this article) shall be deducted from the gross tonnage in order to ascertain the net tonnage ofvessels not propelled by engines, and no other spaces shall be deducted. Unless otherwise expressly stipulated, these spaces shall be deducted whether located above or below the upper deck.
The volume or cubical contents of deducted spaces shall be ascertained in the manner specified in Article VIII or Article IX of these rules. The remainder, resulting from deducting from the total space included in gross tonnage the sum of the cubical contents of the spaces whose deduction from gross tonnage is permitted by these rules, shall be the net or register tonnage of vessels not propelled by engines and unrigged craft upon which tolls and other charges based upon tonnage shall be paid by vessels of commerce, Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships (as defined in Art. I) for passage through the Panama Canal. One hundred cubic feet, or 2.83 cubic meters, shall constitute one gross or net ton.
Spaces for the use, or possible use, of passengers (as defined in Art. VI) shall not be deducted from the gross tonnage, except in so far as their deduction may he specifically provided for in the following sections (1 to 10) of this article of these rules.

Spaces available for the stowage of stores (other than boatswain's stores) or cargo shall not be deducted from gross tonnage. In case of Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships, as defined in Article I, the term "stores (other than boatswain's stores) or cargo" shall include, in addition to goods or cargo ordinarily carried as freight on vessels of commerce, the following articles:

On transports, food, stores, luggage, accouterments, and equipment for passengers.
On colliers, coal, coaling gear, and fuel oil not for the use of the colliers.
On supply ships, stores, supplies of all kinds, distilling machinery and distilled water (other than feed water stored in double-bottom compartments), machines, tools and material for repair work, mines and mining material, torpedoes, arms, and ammunition.
On hospital ships, food stores for passengers, medical stores, and hospital equipment.
Guns mounted on transports and supply ships, for defense of the ships, and ammunition required for use in such guns shall not be classed as cargo.


Art. XI. Each of the spaces enumerated in Article X, sections 1 to 10, unless otherwise specifically stated, shall be subject to such conditions and requirements as to marking or designation and use or purpose as are contained in the navigation or registry laws of the several countries, but no space, other than fuel spaces deducted under Article XIII of these rules, shall be deducted unless the use to which it is to be exclusively devoted has been appropriately designated by official marking. In no case, however, shall an arbitrary maximum limit be fixed to the aggregate deduction made under Article X.

Art. XII. The net or register tonnage upon which tolls and other charges based upon tonnage shall be paid byvesselsof commerce, Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships, as defined in Article I,propelled by engines, for passage through the Panama Canal, shall be the tonnage remaining after the following deductions have been made from the gross tonnage. One hundred cubic feet, or 2.83 cubic meters, shall constitute 1 gross or net ton. Vessels propelled partly by sails and partly by engines shall be classed as "vessels propelled by engines:"


Art. XIII. In ships that do not have fixed bunkers, but transverse bunkers with movable partitions, with or without lateral bunkers, and in ships with fuel tanks or double-bottom fuel compartments which may be used to stow cargo or stores, measure the space occupied by the engine rooms, and add to it for vessels with screw propellers 75 per cent and for vessels with paddle wheels 50 per cent of such space.
By the space occupied by the engine rooms is to be understood that occupied by the engine room itself and the boiler room, together with the spaces strictly required for the working of the engines and boilers, with the addition of the spaces taken up by shaft trunks (in vessels with screw propellers), the spaces which inclose the funnels and the casings necessary for the admission of light and air into the engine room to the extent that such spaces are located below the upper deck or below a deck with openings (usually designated as tonnage openings) which may be so closed as to permit the carriage of cargo or stores under the deck or a portion thereof, and donkey-engine and boiler spaces when the donkey engine and boiler are situated within the boundary of the main engine room or of the light and air casing above it and when they are used in connection with the main machinery for propelling the vessel. When the shafts of screw propellers pass through open spaces not inclosed within tunnels, the spaces allowed in lieu of tunnels must be of reasonable dimensions suitable for the vessel in question. When a portion of the space within the boundary of the engine or boiler rooms is occupied by a tank or tanks for fuel oil or fresh water, the space considered to be within the engine room shall be reduced by the space taken up by the tank or tanks for fuel oil or fresh water.
The cubical contents of the above-named spaces occupied by the engine room shall be ascertained in the following manner: Measure the mean depth of the space occupied by the engines and boilers from its crown to the ceiling at the limber strake; measure also three, or, if necessary, more than three, breadths of the space at the middle of its depth, taking one of such measurements at each end and another at the middle of the length; take the mean of such breadths; measure also the mean length of the space between the foremost and aftermost bulkheads or limits of its length, excluding such parts, if any, as are not actually occupied by or required for the proper working of the engines and boilers. Multiply together these three dimensions of length, breadth, and depth, and the product will be the cubical contents of the space below the crown. Then, by multiplying together the length, breadth, and depth, find the cubical contents of the space or spaces, if any, which are framed in for the machinery, for inclosing the funnels, or for the admission of light and air, and which are located between the crown of the engine room and the uppermost deck or covering of the first or lowest tier of side-to-side erections, if any, on the upper deck, as defined in Art. IV, section 3. Add such contents, as well as those of the space occupied by the shaft trunk and by any donkey engine and boiler located within the boundary of the engine room or of the light and air casing above the engine room and used in connection with the main engines for propelling the ship, to the cubical contents of the space below the crown of the engine room; divide the sum by 100 or by 2.83, according as the measurements are taken in feet or meters, and the result shall be deemed to be the tonnage of the engine and boiler room and shall be the tonnage taken as the basis for calculating the deduction for propelling power.
If in any ship in which the space for propelling power is to be measured the engines and boilers are in separate compartments, the contents of each compartment shall be measured separately in like manner, according to the above method; and the sum of the tonnage of the spaces included in the several compartments shall be deemed to be the tonnage of the engine and boiler rooms, and shall be the tonnage taken as the basis for calculating the deduction for propelling power.

Art. XIV. When vessels are fitted with fixed coal bunkers or with fuel-oil tanks or double-bottom fuel compartments which can not be used to stow cargo or stores, and when such bunkers, tanks, and fuel compartments have been certified by official marking to be spaces for the vessel's fuel, the deduction for propelling power may either be in accordance with the provisions of Article XIII above, or by deducting the actual tonnage of the spaces enumerated in Art. XII, Sec. 2 as measured in accordance with the following provisions, as the owner of the vessel may elect: Measure the mean length of the engine and boiler room, including the coal bunkers. Ascertain the area of three transverse sections of the ship (as set forth in the rules given in Articles VIII or IX for the calculation of the prose tonnage) to the deck which covers the engine. One of these three sections must pass through the middle of the aforesaid length, and the two others through the two extremities. Add to the sum of the two extreme sections four times the middle one, and multiply the sum thus obtained by the third of the distance between the sections. This product divided by 100 if the measurements are taken in English feet, or by 2.83 if they are taken in meters, gives the tonnage of the space measured. If the engines, boilers, and bunkers are in separate compartments, measure each compartment, as above set forth, and add together the results of the several measurements. The bunkers measured for fuel deduction shall include only those bunkers that are absolutely permanent, from which the coal can be trimmed directly into the engine room or stokehole, and into which access can be obtained only through the ordinary coal chutes on deck and from doors opening into the engine room or stokehole. Thwartship bunkers that can be in any way extended are not to be included in the measurements for deductions. When any portion of the engine or boiler rooms is occupied by a tank for fresh water, the space considered to be within the engine and boiler rooms shall be reduced by the space taken up by the tank for fresh water.
The contents of the shaft trunk shall be measured by ascertaining, and multiplying together, the mean length, breadth, and height. The product divided by 100, or 2.83, according as the measurements are taken in English feet or in meters, gives the tonnage of such space. When the shafts of screw propellers pass through open spaces not inclosed within tunnels, the spaces allowed in lieu of tunnels must be of reasonable dimensions suitable for the vessel in question.
The tonnage of the following spaces below the deck or covering of the first or lowest tier of side-to-side erections, if any, on the upper deck, as defined by Art. IV, section 3, is ascertained by the same method, viz: (a) The spaces framed in around the funnels. (b) The spaces required for the admission of light and air into the engine room, (c) The spaces, if any, necessary for the proper working of the engines. (d) Spaces occupied by the donkey engine and boiler when used in connection with the main engines for propelling the ship and when situated within the boundary of the engine room or of the casing above the engine room, (e) Fuel-oil tanks and double-bottom compartments fitted for the stowage of fuel oil.

Art. XV. Under no circumstances shall any space which has not been included in the gross tonnage be deducted from gross tonnage.
The use of the whole or any portion of a deducted space, other than fuel spaces deducted under Article XIII, to stow cargo of any kind or stores other than boatswain's stores, or to provide passenger accommodations, shall be evidence that the entire space thus wholly or partially occupied is a part of the actual earning capacity of the ship and the entire space shall be added to, and become a permanent part of, the net tonnage upon which Panama Canal tolls shall be collected.

Art. XVI. Only such officials as are authorized in the several foreign countries and in the United States to measure vessels and to issue tonnage certificates for purposes of national registry, and such other officials as are authorized by the President of the United States, or by those acting for him, to measure vessels and to issue Panama Canal tonnage certificates, shall have authority to measure vessels for Panama navigation or to issue Panama tonnage certificates.

Art. XVII. Tonnage certificates presented at the Panama Canal shall be subject to correction by the official or officials authorized by the President of the United States, or by those acting for him, to administer these measurement rules, in so far as may be necessary to make the certificates conform to these rules.

Art. XVIII. The Panama Canal tonnage certificates issued by the measurement authorities of the United States and the several foreign countries shall correspond in substance and form to the sample certificate appended to these rules. Blank certificates in English will be furnished by the Secretary of War or the Governor of the Panama Canal upon request of the measurement authorities of foreign countries. The measurement authorities of any foreign country may also provide themselves with Panama Canal measurement certificates printed in English or in the language of the foreign country, provided such certificates strictly correspond in substance and form to the sample certificate appended to these rules.

Art. XIX. The toll on warships, other than Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships, shall be based upon their tonnage of actual displacement at the time of their application for passage through the canal. The displacement tonnage of such warships shall be their displacement before the vessels have taken on such coal, fuel oil, stores, or supplies as may be purchased and taken on board after arrival at the canal for transit through the same.

Art. XX. "Warships" in the meaning of Articles XIX to XXIV shall be considered to be all vessels of war, other than Army and Navy transports, colliers, hospital ships, and supply ships, as defined in Article I. Warships are vessels of Government ownership that are being employed by their owners for military or naval purposes.

Art. XXI. Every warship, other than Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships (as defined in Art. I) upon applying for passage through the Panama Canal shall, in order to facilitate the ascertainment of its mean draft, be anchored or placed at such station or location as shall be designated by the Governor of the Panama Canal or by the officials authorized to act for him.

Art. XXII. The commander of every warship, other than Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships (as defined in Art. I), applying for passage through the Panama Canal shall exhibit for examination by the Governor of the Panama Canal or by the officials authorized to act for the Governor of the Panama Canal an official document containing the vessel's curve of displacement, its curves for addition to displacement for change of trim, and a scale so arranged that the displacement at any given mean draft is shown. Such document or documents shall be issued and be certified as correct by competent authorities of the Government to which the vessel belongs.

Art. XXIII. The actual displacement of warships shall be determined from their official displacement scale and curves, and shall be expressed in tons of 2,240 pounds. Should the displacement scale and curves of a warship show or state the vessel's displacement tonnage in metric tons of 2,204.62 pounds, the tonnage so expressed shall be multiplied by 0.9842 for the purpose of converting the tonnage into tons of 2,240 pounds.

Art. XXIV. Should any warship, other than Army and Navy transports, colliers, supply ships, and hospital ships (as defined in Article I) apply for passage through the Panama Canal and, for reasons satisfactory to the Governor of the Panama Canal, not have on board the duly certified document or documents specified in Article XXII, the Governor of the Panama Canal, or the officials authorized to act for him shall then determine the displacement of the vessel, using such reliable data as may be available, or by taking such dimensions of the vessel and using such approximate methods as may be considered necessary and practicable. The displacement tonnage so determined shall be considered to be the displacement of the vessel.
1: A greater number of divisions is permissible provided there be an even number of divisions.