Woodrow Wilson
October 27, 1919

Message to the House of Representatives Returning Without Approval "An Act to Prohibit Intoxicating Beverages and to Regulate the Manufacture, Production, Use, and Sale of High Proof Spirits for Other Than Beverage Purposes, and to Insure an Ample Supply of Alcohol and Promote Its Use in Scientific Research and in the Development of Fuel, Dye, and Other Lawful Industries"
To the House of Representatives:
I am returning without my signature H.R. 6810, "An act to prohibit intoxicating beverages and to regulate the manufacture, production, use, and sale of high proof spirits for other than beverage purposes, and to insure an ample supply of alcohol and promote its use in scientific research and in the development of fuel, dye, and other lawful industries."
The subject matter treated in this measure deals with two distinct phases of prohibition legislation. One part of the act under consideration seeks to enforce wartime prohibition. The other provides for the enforcement which was made necessary by the adoption of the constitutional amendment. I object to and cannot approve that part of this legislation with reference to wartime prohibition.
It has to do with the enforcement of an act which was passed by reason of the emergencies of the war and whose objects have been satisfied in the demobilization of the army and navy and whose repeal I have already sought at the hands of Congress. Where the purposes of particular legislation arising out of war emergency have been satisfied, sound public policy makes clear the reason and necessity for repeal.
It will not be difficult for Congress in considering this important matter to separate these two questions and effectively to legislate regarding them, making the proper distinction between temporary causes which arose out of the wartime emergencies and those like the constitutional amendment of prohibition, which is now part of the fundamental law of the country.
In all matters having to do with the personal habits and customs of large numbers of our people we must be certain that the established processes of legal change are followed. In no other way can the salutary object sought to be accomplished by great reforms of this character be made satisfactory and permanent.
WOODROW WILSON
THE WHITE HOUSE
27 October, 1919.
APP Note: This is commonly known as the "Volstead Act." Congress overrode his veto and the Act became law on October 28, 1919.