Thomas Jefferson
October 31, 1803

Special Message
To the Senate of the United States of America:
I now lay before you the treaty mentioned in my general message at the opening of the session as having been concluded with the Kaskaskia Indians for the transfer of their country to us under certain reservations and conditions.
Progress having been made in the demarcation of Indian boundaries, I am now able to communicate to you. a treaty with the Delawares, Shawanese, Potawatamies, Miamis, Eel-rivers, Weeds, Kickapoos, Piankeshaws, and Kaskaskias, establishing the boundaries of the territory around St. Vincennes.
Also a supplementary treaty with the Eel-rivers, Wyandots, Piankeshaws, Kaskaskias, and Kickapoos, in confirmation of the fourth article of the preceding treaty.
Also a treaty with the Choctaws, describing and establishing our demarcation of boundaries with them.
Which several treaties are accompanied by the papers relating to them, and are now submitted to the Senate for consideration whether they will advise and consent to their ratification.
TH: JEFFERSON.
NOVEMBER 4, 1803.
To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States:
By the copy now communicated of a letter from Captain Bainbridge, of thePhiladelphiafrigate, to our consul at Gibraltar, you will learn that an act of hostility has been committed on a merchant vessel of the United States by an armed ship of the Emperor of Morocco. This conduct on the part of that power is without cause and without explanation. It is fortunate that Captain Bainbridge fell in with and took the capturing vessel and her prize, and I have the satisfaction to inform you that about the date of this transaction such a force would be arriving in the neighborhood of Gibraltar, both from the east and from the west, as leaves less to be feared for our commerce from the suddenness of the aggression.
On the 4th of September theConstitutionfrigate, Captain Preble, with Mr. Lear on board, was within two days' sail of Gibraltar, where thePhiladelphiawould then be arrived with her prize, and such explanations would probably be instituted as the state of things required, and as might perhaps arrest the progress of hostilities.
In the meanwhile it is for Congress to consider the provisional authorities which may be necessary to restrain the depredations of this power should they be continued.
TH: JEFFERSON.