George W. Bush
August 28, 2007

Remarks Following a Dinner With Elected Officials and Community Leaders in New Orleans, Louisiana
The President.Ms. Chase, thank you for having us here. Laura and I are thrilled to be here with the Governor and the mayor and the Senator, the Congressman, members of my Cabinet, distinguished leaders in this community, and quiet heroes who have helped bring optimism and hope to New Orleans.
We've got social entrepreneurs in our midst, artists in our midst, all of whom have dedicated their lives to the renewal of New Orleans. And we're so honored to be in this restaurant. I know you would want me to say that the food here is about as good as any place here in New Orleans. [Laughter] And I will say it. [Laughter]
Reverend Fred Luter, Jr.It is that good.
The President.It is good. And we're so honored that you gave us a chance to come to the renovated restaurant. I know you're opening in a couple of weeks.
Leah Chase.In a couple of weeks, yes.
The President.Well, we're thrilled that you would allow us to come and taste your beautiful food in this spectacular room. We love your art, but more importantly, we love your spirit.
Mrs. Chase.Thank you.
The President.You're one of the leaders here in this community.
NOTE: The President spoke at 7:55 p.m. at Dooky Chase's Restaurant. In his remarks, he referred to Leah Chase, owner, Dooky Chase's Restaurant; Gov. Kathleen Babineaux Blanco, Sen. Mary L. Landrieu, and Rep. William J. Jefferson of Louisiana; Mayor C. Ray Nagin of New Orleans, LA; and Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Alphonso R. Jackson. Also participating in the dinner were Donald E. Powell, Federal Coordinator, Office of Gulf Coast Rebuilding; Raymond S. "Coach" Blanco, husband of Gov. Blanco; Tommy Andrade, owner, Blanca, LLC; John Besh, executive chef, Restaurant August and Besh Steakhouse at Harrah's Casino; Dr. Dale Betterton, comanager, Operation Blessing Medical Clinic; Julia Bland, executive director, Louisiana Children's Museum; Drew Brees, quarterback, New Orleans Saints; Joseph C. Canizaro, chairman and chief executive officer, Columbus Properties; Daryn Dodson, IDEAcorps fellow, Idea Village; Norman C. Francis, chairman, and Kim M. Boyle, member, Louisiana Recovery Authority; Lt. Gen. Russel L. Honore, USA, commanding general, First United States Army; Jared Kahan, volunteer, AmeriCorps; Jay Lapeyre, chairman, Business Council of New Orleans; Agustin "Augie" Lopez, owner, Smilie's Restaurant; Rev. Fred Luter, Jr., pastor, Franklin Street Baptist Church, New Orleans, LA; musician Irvin Mayfield; Father Nguyen The Vien, pastor, Mary Queen of Vietnam Church, New Orleans, LA; and Becky Zaheri, president and founder, Katrina Krewe.