George W. Bush
February 14, 2005

Letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives Transmitting a Request for Fiscal Year 2005 Supplemental Appropriations for Ongoing Military and Intelligence Operations and Selected Other International Activities
Dear Mr. Speaker:
Today, I am submitting a request for fiscal year 2005 supplemental appropriations of $81.9 billion for ongoing military and intelligence operations in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom, and selected other international activities, including tsunami relief and reconstruction. This request reflects urgent and essential requirements. I ask the Congress to appropriate the funds as requested and promptly send the bill to me for signature.
These funds will support U.S. Armed Forces and Coalition partners as we advance democracy, fight the insurgency, and train and equip Iraqi security forces so that they can defend their sovereignty and freedom. In Afghanistan, our Armed Forces continue to track down terrorists, help the Afghan people rebuild their country, and train and equip Afghan security forces so that Afghanistan, too, may continue to take control of its democratic future.
My request will provide funds needed to repair, refurbish, and procure equipment needed by the Armed Forces to win the War on Terror. In addition, this request will fund the Army's Modularity plan to restructure three brigades deploying to Iraq.
Finally, this request will assist the Palestinians as they build a democratic state, will provide relief for the humanitarian crisis in Darfur, and will support relief, rehabilitation, and reconstruction efforts in countries devastated by the recent Indian Ocean tsunami.
I hereby designate the specific proposals in the amounts requested herein as emergency requirements. I urge the Congress not to attach to this proposal items that are not directly related to these emergencies abroad. The details of the request are set forth in the enclosed letter from the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Sincerely,
GEORGE W. BUSH