George W. Bush
January 29, 2003

Executive Order 13285—Presidents Council on Service and Civic Participation
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to encourage the recognition of volunteer service and civic participation by all Americans, and especially America's youth, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. The President's Council on Service and Civic Participation. (a) There is hereby established within the Corporation for National and Community Services (CNCS) the President's Council on Service and Civic Participation (Council).
(b) The Council shall be composed of up to 25 members, including representatives of America's youth, appointed by the President. Each member shall serve for a term of 2 years and may continue to serve after the expiration of their term until a successor is appointed. The President shall designate one member to serve as Chair and one member to serve as Vice Chair. Subject to the direction of the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS, the Chair, and in the Chair's absence the Vice Chair, shall convene and preside at the meetings of the Council, determine its agenda, and direct its work.
Sec. 2. Mission and Functions of the Council.
(b) In carrying out its mission, the Council shall:
programs developed pursuant to subsection 2(b)(i) of this order;
(iii) advise the Chief Executive Officer of the CNCS on broad dissemination, especially among schools and youth organizations, of information regarding recommended practices for the promotion of volunteer service and civic participation, and other relevant educational and promotional materials;
Sec. 3. Administration. (a) Each Federal agency, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, shall furnish such information and assistance to the Council as the Council may, with the approval of the Director of the USA Freedom Corps, request.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

January 29, 2003.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., January 31, 2003]
Note: This Executive order was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on January 30, and it was published in the Federal Register on February 3.