George W. Bush
January 08, 2003

Remarks on Signing Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Legislation Prior to a Meeting With Congressional Leaders
The President.Thank you all for coming today. I'm going to have a statement, and then we'll ask you to leave so we can get down to our business.
I want to welcome Members of the Senate and the House, both Republicans and Democrats, for this, the first of many meetings we'll have this year to figure out how we can work together and get some things done on behalf of the American people.
Yesterday and today the Senate and the House acted on behalf of the unemployed workers of America. I have the extension of unemployment benefits in front of me. I want to congratulate Senators Frist and Daschle and Speaker Hastert and Leader Pelosi for the good work on behalf of the American workers.
And right now it is my honor to sign this piece of legislation, which should bring some comfort to those of our fellow citizens who need extra help during the time in which they try to find a job. So congratulations for a good job, and it's my honor to sign the bill.
[At this point, the President signed the bill.]
The President.I signed this, and I intend to sign a lot of other bills this year. And I know the only reason I'll be able to do so is because we're going to work together. We owe that to the American people. It's the spirit that now prevails in this room. And I look forward to working with Members of both parties to get a lot done to make America a safer place, a stronger place, and a better place.
Thank you.
NOTE: The President spoke at 4:08 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. S. 23, approved January 8, to provide for a 5-month extension of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 and for a transition period for individuals receiving compensation when the program under such Act ends, was assigned Public Law No. 108–1. The Office of the Press Secretary also released a Spanish language transcript of these remarks.