George W. Bush
January 27, 2004

Executive Order 13326—Presidents Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to obtain recommendations concerning implementation of the new vision for space exploration activities of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment. There is hereby established the President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (the "Commission").
Sec. 2. Membership. (a) The Commission shall be composed of not more than nine members appointed by the President, taking into account as appropriate the experience of such individuals with respect to governmental, scientific, and technical matters relating to space.
cluding the use of lunar and other in situ natural resources, that could be used for sustainable human and robotic exploration;
(iii) Criteria that could be used to select future destinations for human exploration;
(vii) Management of the implementation of the Policy within available resources.
Sec. 4. Administration. (a) The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) shall provide, to the extent permitted by law, administrative support and funding for the Commission. The Commission is established in NASA for administrative purposes only.
Sec. 5. Report. The Commission shall submit its final report to the President through the Administrator within 120 days of the first meeting of the Commission.
Sec. 6. General Provisions. (a) This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and it is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
(b) The Commission shall terminate within 60 days after submitting its final report.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

January 27, 2004.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 11:02 a.m., February 2, 2004]
Note: This Executive order was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on January 30, and it was published in the Federal Register on February 3. This item was not received in time for publication in the appropriate issue.