George W. Bush
January 07, 2005

Executive Order 13369—Presidents Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and to assist in reforming the Federal Internal Revenue Code to benefit all Americans, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment. There is established the President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform (Advisory Panel).
Sec. 2. Membership. (a) The Advisory Panel shall be composed of up to nine members appointed by the President.
(b) The President shall designate one member of the Advisory Panel to serve as Chair and one member to serve as Vice Chair.
Sec. 3. Purpose. The purpose of the Advisory Panel shall be to submit to the Secretary
of the Treasury in accordance with this order a report with revenue neutral policy options for reforming the Federal Internal Revenue Code. These options should:
At least one option submitted by the Advisory Panel should use the Federal income tax as the base for its recommended reforms.
Sec. 4. Administration. (a) The Department of the Treasury shall provide, to the extent permitted by law, administrative support and funding for the Advisory Panel. The Advisory Panel is established within the Department of the Treasury for administrative purposes only.
Sec. 5. Report. The Advisory Panel shall submit to the Secretary of the Treasury a report containing policy options in accordance with section 3 of this order as soon as practicable, but not later than July 31, 2005.
Sec. 6. Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budget, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the United States, its departments, agencies, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
Sec. 7. Termination. The Advisory Panel shall terminate 30 days after submitting its report pursuant to section 5 of this order. GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

January 7, 2005.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 9:02 a.m., January 11, 2005]
Note: This Executive order will be published in the Federal Register on January 12.