George W. Bush
January 21, 2003

Executive Order 13283—Establishing the Office of Global Communications
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment of the Office of Global Communications. There is hereby established within the White House Office an Office of Global Communications (the "Office") to be headed by a Deputy Assistant to the President for Global Communications.
Sec. 2. Mission. The mission of the Office shall be to advise the President, the heads of appropriate offices within the Executive Office of the President, and the heads of executive departments and agencies (agencies) on utilization of the most effective means for the United States Government to ensure consistency in messages that will promote the interests of the United States abroad, prevent misunderstanding, build support for and among coalition partners of the United States, and inform international audiences. The Office shall provide such advice on activities in which the role of the United States Government is apparent or publicly acknowledged.
Sec. 3. Functions. In carrying out its mission:
deployed abroad without prior consultation with the Department of State and the Department of Defense, and prior notification to the Office of the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
(d) The Office shall encourage the use of state-of-the-art media and technology and shall advise the United States Government of events, technologies, and other communications tools that may be available for use in conveying information.
Sec. 4. Administration. The Office of Administration within the Executive Office of the President shall provide the Office with administrative and related support, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations, as directed by the Chief of Staff to the President to carry out the provisions of this order.
Sec. 5. Relationship to Other Interagency Coordinating Mechanisms. Presidential direction regarding National Security Councilrelated mechanisms for coordination of national security policy shall apply with respect to the Office in the same manner as it applies with respect to other elements of the White House Office. Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect any function assigned by law or by the President to the National Security Council or to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
Sec. 6. Continuing Authorities. This order does not alter the existing authorities of any agency. Agencies shall assist the Deputy Assistant to the President for Global Communications, to the extent consistent with applicable law and direction of the President, and to the extent such assistance is consistent with national security objectives and with the mission of such agencies, in carrying out the Office's mission.
Sec. 7. General Provisions.
to issue direction to agencies, officers, or employees.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

January 21, 2003.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., January 23, 2003]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on January 24.