George W. Bush
July 28, 2008

Joint Statement by the United States of America and Pakistan on Strategic Partnership
President George W. Bush welcomed Prime Minister Syed Yousaf Raza Gilani to Washington today for his first visit to the United States as the leader of Pakistan's democratically elected civilian government. The President and Prime Minister reaffirmed their commitment to the long-term Strategic Partnership between the United States and Pakistan, which is based on shared values and holds immense potential for the enduring peace, security, stability, freedom, and prosperity of Pakistan and of the region. The President affirmed his support for Pakistan's sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity. The two leaders agreed that the focus of the broad-based Pakistan-U.S. relationship should remain on ensuring the well being of the people by assisting Pakistan to implement its national development agenda in a comprehensive manner. Pakistan and the United States will work together to eliminate the threat of extremism, build strong democratic institutions, modernize education, and increase economic growth and opportunity.
President Bush and Prime Minister Gilani reaffirmed their condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. They acknowledged that terrorism and violent extremism pose a common threat to Pakistan, the United States, and the international community. The two leaders pledged to work together to address this threat and to deny any space to militants or terrorists through increased cooperation. The President recognized the sacrifices the people of Pakistan and the Pakistani security forces have made in the ongoing fight. The President and Prime Minister reiterated that success in countering terrorism will require a comprehensive strategy, including increased security, improved governance, and opportunity for socio-economic development for the people especially in the less developed regions of Pakistan. The President and the Prime Minister expressed deep sympathy for the families of those who have fallen victim to suicide and other terrorist attacks in Pakistan. The Prime Minister expressed appreciation for U.S. efforts to promote peace and stability in the region. The United States is dedicated to providing Pakistan with the support and tools it needs to lead the fight against terrorism.
The two leaders also committed to increased bilateral economic cooperation to include expanded trade, an improved investment climate, promoting cooperation in the public and private sectors, and agreed to work together to ensure food and energy security as well as facilitate investment in infrastructure and social sectors in Pakistan.
In reaffirming the Strategic Partnership, President Bush and Prime Minister Gilani attached importance to the next round of the Strategic Dialogue, which will be cochaired by the U.S. Deputy Secretary of State and Pakistan's Foreign Minister, in September 2008 and regularly thereafter to review issues of mutual interest. In addition, the two leaders committed both countries to undertake the following steps in development, counterterrorism, economic, and regional cooperation:
Focus on the needs of the Pakistani people: Food, Health, Education, Energy, and Democratic Governance
Expand Bilateral Trade and Improve the Business Climate
Expand Security and Counterterrorism Cooperation
Work Together to Enhance Regional Peace, Security, and Stability
Prime Minister Gilani thanked President Bush and the people of the United States for the hospitality accorded to him, Mrs. Gilani, and the members of the Prime Ministerial delegation during their stay in the United States.
NOTE: An original was not available for verification of the content of this joint statement.