George W. Bush
March 03, 2003

Executive Order 13287—Preserve America
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C.
470 et seq.) (NHPA) and the National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), it is hereby ordered:
Section 1. Statement of Policy. It is the policy of the Federal Government to provide leadership in preserving America's heritage by actively advancing the protection, enhancement, and contemporary use of the historic properties owned by the Federal Government, and by promoting intergovernmental cooperation and partnerships for the preservation and use of historic properties. The Federal Government shall recognize and manage the historic properties in its ownership as assets that can support department and agency missions while contributing to the vitality and economic well-being of the Nation's communities and fostering a broader appreciation for the development of the United States and its underlying values. Where consistent with executive branch department and agency missions, governing law, applicable preservation standards, and where appropriate, executive branch departments and agencies ("agency" or "agencies") shall advance this policy through the protection and continued use of the historic properties owned by the Federal Government, and by pursuing partnerships with State and local governments, Indian tribes, and the private sector to promote the preservation of the unique cultural heritage of communities and of the Nation and to realize the economic benefit that these properties can provide. Agencies shall maximize efforts to integrate the policies, procedures, and practices of the NHPA and this order into their program activities in order to efficiently and effectively advance historic preservation objectives in the pursuit of their missions.
Sec. 2. Building Preservation Partnerships. When carrying out its mission activities, each agency, where consistent with its mission and governing authorities, and where appropriate, shall seek partnerships with State and local governments, Indian tribes, and the private sector to promote local economic development and vitality through the use of historic properties in a manner that contributes to the long-term preservation and productive use of those properties. Each agency shall examine its policies, procedures,
and capabilities to ensure that its actions encourage, support, and foster public-private initiatives and investment in the use, reuse, and rehabilitation of historic properties, to the extent such support is not inconsistent with other provisions of law, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Archeology and Historic Preservation, and essential national department and agency mission requirements.
Sec. 3. Improving Federal Agency Planning and Accountability. (a) Accurate information on the state of Federally owned historic properties is essential to achieving the goals of this order and to promoting community economic development through local partnerships. Each agency with real property management responsibilities shall prepare an assessment of the current status of its inventory of historic properties required by section 110(a)(2) of the NHPA (16 U.S.C. 470h– 2(a)(2)), the general condition and management needs of such properties, and the steps underway or planned to meet those management needs. The assessment shall also include an evaluation of the suitability of the agency's types of historic properties to contribute to community economic development initiatives, including heritage tourism, taking into account agency mission needs, public access considerations, and the long-term preservation of the historic properties. No later than September 30, 2004, each covered agency shall complete a report of the assessment and make it available to the Chairman of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Council) and the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary).
30, 2005, and every third year thereafter, prepare a report on its progress in identifying, protecting, and using historic properties in its ownership and make the report available to the Council and the Secretary. The Council shall incorporate this data into a report on the state of the Federal Government's historic properties and their contribution to local economic development and submit this report to the President by February 15, 2006, and every third year thereafter.
and where appropriate, agencies shall cooperate with communities to increase opportunities for public benefit from, and access to, Federally owned historic properties.
Sec. 5. Promoting Preservation Through Heritage Tourism.
and local tourism programs to foster viable economic partnerships, including, but not limited to, cooperation and coordination with tourism officials and others with interests in the properties.
Sec. 6. National and Homeland Security Considerations.
Nothing in this order shall be construed to require any agency to take any action or disclose any information that would conflict with or compromise national and homeland security goals, policies, programs, or activities.
Sec. 7. Definitions. For the purposes of this order, the term "historic property" means any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, and object included on or eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places in accordance with section 301(5) of the NHPA (16 U.S.C. 470w(5)). The term "heritage tourism" means the business and practice of attracting and accommodating visitors to a place or area based especially on the unique or special aspects of that locale's history, landscape (including trail systems), and culture. The terms "Federally owned" and "in Federal ownership," and similar terms, as used in this order, do not include properties acquired by agencies as a result of foreclosure or similar actions and that are held for a period of less than 5 years.
Sec. 8. Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the Federal Government and it is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person. GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

March 3, 2003.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 8:45 a.m., March 4, 2003]
Note: This Executive order was published in the Federal Register on March 5.