George W. Bush
November 21, 2003

Executive Order 13318—Presidential Management Fellows Program
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including sections 3301 and 3302 of title 5, United States Code, and in order to provide for the recruitment and selection of outstanding employees for service in public sector management, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. There is hereby constituted the Presidential Management Fellows Program. The purpose of the Program is to attract to the Federal service outstanding men and women from a variety of academic disciplines and career paths who have a clear interest in, and commitment to, excellence in the leadership and management of public policies and programs. Individuals selected for the Program shall be known as Presidential Management Fellows (PMFs) or Senior Presidential Management Fellows (Senior PMFs).
Sec. 2. (a) Individuals eligible for appointment as a PMF under this order are those who, in pursuing a course of study at the graduate level, have demonstrated both exceptional ability and the commitment to which section 1 refers. Such individuals at the time of application must have received, or must expect to receive soon thereafter, an appropriate advanced degree as defined by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).
to appoint a fellow who is to be employed in that department, agency, or component;
Sec. 4. (a) Fellows shall be appointed to positions in either:
(1) Schedule A of the excepted service; or
quirements as the Director of OPM may prescribe. A fellow appointed by an agency excepted from the competitive service may also be appointed to a permanent position in an excepted service agency without further competition.
Sec. 5. The Director of OPM shall provide for an orderly transition, including with respect to nominations, selection processes, and appointments, from the Presidential Management Intern Program established by Executive Order 12364 of May 24, 1982, to the Presidential Management Fellows Program established by this order. Until that transition is provided for, individuals who were selected or appointed under the provisions of Executive Order 12364 and who have not completed their scheduled periods of excepted service are hereby redesignated as Presidential Management Fellows, and continue their internships under the terms of Executive Order 12364.
Sec. 6. The Director of OPM shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order.
Sec. 7. Executive Order 12364 is superseded, except as provided in section 5 of this order.
Sec. 8. This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person. GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

November 21, 2003.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 10:46 a.m., November 24, 2003]
Note: This Executive order will be published in the Federal Register on November 25.