George W. Bush
October 22, 2007

Letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives Transmitting a Request for Fiscal Year 2008 Supplemental Appropriations for Ongoing Military and Intelligence Operations and Selected Other International Activities
Dear Madam Speaker:
I ask the Congress to consider the enclosed amendments to my FY 2008 Budget request that will provide additional resources for ongoing military and intelligence operations in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom, and selected other international activities. These funds will support U.S. efforts to improve stability in these regions. This request is also consistent with the assessments provided by General David Petraeus and Ambassador Ryan Crocker last month and my Iraq Benchmark Assessment Report, as it contains funds to maintain the current pace of operations into FY 2008 and takes into account plans to redeploy five Army brigades by next summer, should conditions on the ground permit.
This request includes funds to improve the protection of our forces by procuring additional Mine Resistant Ambush Protected vehicles, which have proved highly effective in countering improvised explosive devices. It also supports pre-deployment training for ground forces; supports the repair, replacement, or supplement of equipment worn out or lost in military operations; upgrades equipment based on lessons learned to date; replenishes depleted prepositioned stocks; and fills shortages in non-deployed units caused by the creation of equipment pools in theater.
In addition, it helps support our military and their families by funding a range of needed services. For example, the request funds the development of a sustainable medical and rehabilitation system to properly care for our wounded warriors. The request also funds enhanced support for servicemembers and their families to mitigate the effect of repeated and continued deployments of the all-volunteer force.
These amendments include funding for urgent and unanticipated international programs, including support for extraordinary security and operating costs associated with U.S. diplomatic activity in Iraq and Afghanistan, for assistance to internally displaced persons in Iraq and Iraqi refugees, and to help create political and economic stability in Afghanistan.
I hereby designate the specific proposals in the amounts requested herein as emergency requirements. This request represents urgent and essential requirements and I encourage you to take up this FY 2008 funding as soon as possible. The details of the request are set forth in the enclosed letter from the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Sincerely,
GEORGE W. BUSH