George W. Bush
October 20, 2004

Executive Order 13360—Providing Opportunities for Service-Disabled Veteran Businesses To Increase Their Federal Contracting and Subcontracting
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to strengthen opportunities in Federal contracting for service-disabled veteran businesses, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. America honors the extraordinary service rendered to the United States by veterans with disabilities incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during active service with the armed forces. Heads of agencies shall provide the opportunity for service-disabled veteran businesses to significantly increase the Federal contracting and subcontracting of such businesses. To achieve that objective, agencies shall more
effectively implement section 15(g) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 644(g)), which provides that the President must establish a goal of not less than 3 percent for participation by service-disabled veteran businesses in Federal contracting, and section 36 of that Act (15 U.S.C. 657f), which gives agency contracting officers the authority to reserve certain procurements for service-disabled veteran businesses.
Sec. 2. Duties of Agency Heads. To implement the policy set forth in section 1, heads of agencies shall:
(iii) encouraging agency contractors to subcontract with service-disabled veteran businesses and actively monitoring and evaluating agency contractors' efforts to do so;
ticipating in awards of agency contracts.
Sec. 3. Additional Duties of Administrator of the Small Business Administration. The Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall:
Sec. 4. Additional Duties of Administrator of General Services. The Administrator of General Services shall:
Sec. 5. Additional Duties of the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary of Defense shall direct the Defense Acquisition University (DAU) to develop training on contracting with service-disabled veteran businesses and make this training available on line through the DAU continuous learning program.
Sec. 6. Additional Duties of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs. The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall assist agencies by making available services of the CVE and assist in verifying the accuracy of contractor registration databases with regard to service-disabled veteran businesses.
Sec. 7. Additional Duties of the Secretary of Labor and Secretary of Veterans Affairs. The Secretary of Labor and Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, respectively, direct the Transition Assistance Program and the Disability Transition Assistance Program to educate separating service members as to the benefits available to service-disabled veteran
businesses and as to potential entrepreneurial opportunities.
Sec. 8. Definitions. As used in this order:
entities, its officers, employees or agents, or any other person.
GEORGE W. BUSH

The White House,

October 20, 2004.
[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 9:40 a.m., October 25, 2004]
Note: This Executive order was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on October 21, and it will be published in the Federal Register on October 26.