Franklin D. Roosevelt
April 25, 1938

Message to Congress on Terminating Tax Exemptions.
To the Congress:
The sixteenth amendment to the Constitution of the United States, approved in 1913, expressly authorized the Congress "to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived." That is plain language. Fairly construed, this language would seem to authorize taxation of income derived from state and municipal, as well as federal bonds, and also income derived from state and municipal as well as federal offices.
This seemingly obvious construction of the Sixteenth Amendment, however, was not followed in judicial decisions by the courts. Instead, a policy of reciprocal tax immunity was read into the Sixteenth Amendment. This resulted in exempting the income from federal bonds from state taxation and exempting the income from State bonds from federal taxation.
Whatever advantages this reciprocal immunity may have had in the early days of this nation have long ago disappeared. Today it has created a vast reservoir of tax exempt securities in the hands of the very persons who equitably should not be relieved of taxes on their income. This reservoir now constitutes a serious menace to the fiscal systems of both the states and the nation because for years both the federal government and the states have come to rely increasingly upon graduated income taxes for their revenues.
Both the states and the nation are deprived of revenues which could be raised from those best able to supply them. Neither the federal government nor the states receive any adequate, compensating advantage for the reciprocal tax-immunity accorded to income derived from their respective obligations and offices.
A similar problem is created by the exemption from state or federal taxation of a great army of state and federal officers and employees. The number of persons on the pay rolls of both state and federal government has increased in recent years. Tax exemptions claimed by such officers and employees—once an inequity of relatively slight importance—has become a most serious defect in the fiscal systems of the States and the nation, for they rely increasingly upon graduated income taxes for their revenues.
It is difficult to defend today the continuation of either of these rapidly expanding areas of tax exemption. Fundamentally our tax laws are intended to apply to all citizens equally. That does not mean that the same rate of income tax should apply to the very rich man and to the very poor man. Long ago the United States, through the Congress, accepted the principle that citizens should pay in accordance with their ability to pay, and that identical tax rates on the rich and on the poor actually worked an injustice to the poor. Hence the origin of progressive surtaxes on personal income as the individual personal income increases.
Tax exemptions through the ownership of government securities of many kinds—federal, state and local—have operated against the fair or effective collection of progressive surtaxes. Indeed, I think it is fair to say that these exemptions have violated the spirit of the tax law itself by actually giving a greater advantage to those with large incomes than to those with small incomes.
Men with great means best able to assume business risks have been encouraged to lock up substantial portions of their funds in tax-exempt securities. Men with little means who should be encouraged to hold the secure obligations of the federal and state governments have been obliged to pay a relatively higher price for those securities than the very rich because the tax immunity is of much less value to them than to those whose incomes fall in the higher brackets.
For more than twenty years Secretaries of the Treasury have reported to the Congress the growing evils of these tax exemptions. Economists generally have regarded them as wholly inconsistent with any rational system of progressive taxation.
Therefore, I lay before the Congress the statement that a fair and effective progressive income tax and a huge perpetual reserve of tax-exempt bonds cannot exist side by side.
The desirability of this recommendation has been apparent for some time but heretofore it has been assumed that the Congress was obliged to wait upon that cumbersome and uncertain remedy—a constitutional amendment—before taking action. Today, however, expressions in recent judicial opinions lead us to hope that the assumptions underlying these doctrines are being questioned by the court itself and that these tax immunities are not inexorable requirements under the Constitution itself but are the result of judicial decision. Therefore, it is not unreasonable to hope that judicial decision may find it possible to correct it. The doctrine was originally evolved out of a totally different set of economic circumstances from those which now exist. It is a familiar principle of law that decisions lose their binding force when the reasons supporting them no longer are pertinent.
I, therefore, recommend to the Congress that effective action be promptly taken to terminate these tax-exemptions for the future. The legislation should confer the same powers on the states with respect to the taxation of federal bonds hereafter issued as is granted to the federal government with respect to state and municipal bonds hereafter issued.
The same principles of just taxation apply to tax exemptions of official salaries. The federal government does not now levy income taxes on the hundreds of thousands of state, county and municipal employees. Nor do the states, under existing decisions, levy income taxes on the salaries of the hundreds of thousands of federal employees. Justice in a great democracy should treat those who earn their livelihood from government in the same way as it treats those who earn their livelihood in private employ.
I recommend, therefore, that the Congress enact legislation ending tax exemption on government salaries of all kinds, conferring powers on the states with respect to federal salaries and powers to the federal government with respect to state and local government salaries.
Such legislation can, I believe, be enacted by a short and simple statute. It would subject all future state and local bonds to existing federal taxes; and it would confer similar powers on states in relation to future federal issues.
At the same time, such a statute would subject state and local employees to existing federal income taxes; and confer on the states the equivalent power to tax the salaries of federal employees.
The ending of tax exemption, be it of government securities or of government salaries, is a matter, not of politics, but of principle.