Franklin D. Roosevelt
April 21, 1937

Greeting to the Red Cross.
My dear Admiral Grayson:
First let me express my sincere regret at not being able to be present at this meeting of the American Red Cross. I cannot omit this opportunity, however, to express my continued interest and admiration for the splendid and notable work which the officers and membership of the American Red Cross and its chapters in all parts of the country have done.
During the past two years the organization has given assistance and comfort to almost two million persons stricken by disaster. Twice has the Red Cross faced catastrophes of almost overwhelming proportions. In the Spring of 1936 devastating floods swept the Eastern states, while this year one and a half million people suffered in the Ohio and Mississippi valleys in the greatest flood disaster that has ever visited this nation. In each instance an appeal was made to our citizens for Red Cross relief for the homeless, and a generous public did not fail to respond.
The work did not end with the urgent emergency of rescuing, housing, feeding and providing hospital care for the victims of the flood, but was carried on until thousands of houses were repaired, furniture replaced, and those supporting their families enabled to return to their regular occupations. The whole of this great task has been done because of the generous giving of the public to the Red Cross, and the efficient operation of the great Red Cross organization. For fifty-six years now the Red Cross has been ever ready to move to any scene of distress, and these past two years have given us every cause to be increasingly grateful that we have this volunteer organization of our citizens through which we can express our humane impulses.
In addition to these tasks which the Red Cross has accomplished, it carries on many others of which the public hears less but which are of great importance to our people. These include training in first aid, in life saving, in home care of the sick, in home hygiene and accident prevention. Finally, the enrollment and training of eight million school children as a Junior Red Cross has been an important step for the training of youth in community service and good will.
Very sincerely yours,
Rear Admiral Cary T. Grayson,

National Chairman, American Red Cross,

Washington, D. C.