Franklin D. Roosevelt
August 19, 1933

Executive Order 6252 on the Public Works Administration.
A. DELEGATION OF FUNCTIONS AND POWERS
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Section 201 (a) of the National Industrial Recovery Act, approved June 16, 1933, I hereby delegate to the Federal Emergency Administrator of Public Works the following functions and powers:
1. To establish such agencies, to accept and utilize such voluntary and uncompensated services, and to utilize such Federal officers and employees and, with the consent of the State, such State and local officers and employees as he may find necessary, and to prescribe their authorities, duties, responsibilities, and tenure.
2. Under the conditions prescribed in Section 203 of said Act, to construct, finance, or aid in the construction or financing of any public works project included in the program prepared pursuant to Section 202 of said Act; upon such terms as he shall prescribe, to make grants to States, municipalities, or other public bodies for the construction, repair, or improvement of any such project; to acquire by purchase, or by exercise of the power of eminent domain, any real or personal property' in connection with the construction of any such project and to lease any such property, with or without the privilege of purchase; and to aid in the financing of such railroad maintenance and equipment as may be approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission as desirable for the improvement of transportation facilities.
3. In deciding to extend any aid or grant to any State, county, or municipality, to consider whether action is in process or in good faith assured therein reasonably designed to bring the ordinary current expenditures thereof within the prudently estimated revenues thereof.
4. In his discretion, and under such terms as he may prescribe, to extend any of the benefits of Title II of said Act to any State, county, or municipality notwithstanding any constitutional or legal restriction or limitation on the right or power of such State, county, or municipality to borrow money or incur indebtedness.
B. REGULATIONS
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 209 of the National Industrial Recovery Act I hereby prescribe the following rules and regulations as necessary to carry out the purposes of Title II of said Act:
1. No convict labor shall be employed on any project constructed in whole or in part under the provisions of Title II of said Act. No materials manufactured or produced by convict labor shall be used on any such project.
2. No contractor or sub-contractor on any such project who is subject to a code adopted pursuant to Title I of said Act shall permit any employee to work in excess of the hours of labor prescribed in said code. No other contractor or sub-contractor shall permit any employee to work more than 30 hours in any one week, except by authority of the Administrator; provided that working time lost in any week because of inclement weather or unavoidable delay may be worked within the succeeding 20 days; provided further, that in localities where a sufficient amount of labor is unavailable in the immediate vicinity of the project a maximum of 130 hours of labor in any calendar month may be authorized by the Administrator; provided further, that in localities so remote and inaccessible that employees must be housed in camps the Administrator may authorize labor not to exceed 8 hours in any one day and 40 hours in any one week.
3. No employee on any such project shall be paid less than a just and reasonable wage which shall be compensation sufficient to provide for the hours of labor as limited, a standard of living in decency and comfort. All such wages shall be paid in lawful money of the United States in the full amount earned by each individual at the time of payment, not less often than once each week, and without deduction on account of goods purchased, rent, or other obligations, which obligations shall be subject to collection only by legal process.
4. Each contractor or sub-contractor on any such project shall post in a prominent and easily accessible place at the site of the work a legible statement of all wage rates paid.
5. Should it appear that any individual employed on any such project has been or is being paid less than hereinbefore prescribed, the Administrator shall notify the employer of such individual to pay him all wages due according to the prescribed rate. Upon 10 days default on the part of such employer he shall be liable to the penalties provided in said Act for violation of these regulations.
6. Any violation of these rules and regulations may be notified by the Administrator to the District Attorney of the appropriate district, who will proceed, if so directed by the Attorney General, to bring a criminal action for such violation.