Franklin D. Roosevelt
July 11, 1935

Greetings to Disabled American Veterans.
My dear Commander Mooney:
I am indeed appreciative of your cordial invitation to attend and address the Fifteenth Annual National Convention of the Disabled American Veterans of the World War to be held at New Haven, Connecticut, July 17-20. I am exceedingly sorry to have to advise you that it will be impossible for me to join you during your convention.
I understand that one of the requirements of your organization is that a man to be eligible for membership must have been disabled in his Nation's service. Your organization being composed of disabled veterans, its purposes, aims and desires assume especial significance and its primary interests become well defined. Such a group as yours becomes especially well qualified to speak of the needs among our Nation's war disabled, since you can measure those needs through the experience of your own membership. I know in this connection that you have sincerely cooperated with the Government in meeting its recognized obligation and appreciation for the services rendered by our soldiers and sailors during the World War.
Many of you, I know, must bear the visible signs of conflict, and your presence in New Haven or any other city must stand as a living example of the sacrifices made by our citizens during the World War. Certainly, you should be received with open arms and our citizens generally should do all in their power to make your conventions occasions for happy recollections.
From the standpoint of the Government, may I add that there can never be any question but that the war disabled should be adequately compensated, both in the form of compensation and care, for the sacrifices they have made in order not only to meet the debt to them of a grateful Nation, but also to make up for the loss in earning power in our post-war economic structure?
Please extend to your membership meeting in New Haven my personal greetings and my best wishes for a happy and successful convention.
Very sincerely yours,
Mr. Volney P. Mooney, Jr.,

Disabled American Veterans of the World War,

Cincinnati, Ohio