Franklin D. Roosevelt
July 11, 1944

Letter Agreeing to Accept a Nomination for a Fourth Term.
Dear Mr. Hannegan:
You have written me that in accordance with the records a majority of the delegates have been directed to vote for my renomination for the office of President, and I feel that I owe to you, in candor, a simple statement of my position.
If the Convention should carry this out, and nominate me for the Presidency, I shall accept. If the people elect me, I will serve.
Every one of our sons serving in this war has officers from whom he takes his orders. Such officers have superior officers. The President is the Commander in Chief and he, too, has his superior officer- the people of the United States.
I would accept and serve, but I would not run, in the usual partisan, political sense. But if the people command me to continue in this office and in this war, I have as little fight to withdraw as the soldier has to leave his post in the line.
At the same time, I think I have a right to say to you and to the delegates to the coming Convention something which is personal—purely personal.
For myself, I do not want to run. By next Spring, I shall have been President and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces for twelve years—three times elected by the people of this country under the American Constitutional system.
From the personal point of view, I believe that our economic system is on a sounder, more human basis than it was at the time of my first inauguration.
It is perhaps unnecessary to say that I have thought only of the good of the American people. My principal objective, as you know, has been the protection of the rights and privileges and fortunes of what has been so well called the average of American citizens.
After many years of public service, therefore, my personal thoughts have turned to the day when I could return to civil life. All that is within me cries out to go back to my home on the Hudson River, to avoid public' responsibilities, and to avoid also the publicity which in our democracy follows every step of the Nation's Chief Executive.
Such would be my choice. But we of this generation chance to live in a day and hour when our Nation has been attacked, and when its future existence and the future existence of our chosen method of government are at stake.
To win this war wholeheartedly, unequivocally, and as quickly as we can is our task of the first importance. To win this war in such a way that there be no further world wars in the foreseeable future is our second objective. To provide occupations, and to provide a decent standard of living for our men in the armed forces after the war, and for all Americans, are the final objectives.
Therefore, reluctantly, but as a good soldier, I repeat that I will accept and serve in this office, if I am so ordered by the Commander in Chief of us all—the sovereign people of the United States.
Very sincerely yours,