Franklin D. Roosevelt
July 11, 1933

Executive Order 6202A Appointing the Executive Council.
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Acts of Congress respectively entitled, "An Act for the relief of unemployment through the performance of useful public work, and for other purposes," approved March 31, 1933 (Public No. 5, 73d Congress), and "An Act to encourage national industrial recovery, to foster fair competition, and to provide for the construction of certain useful public works, and for other purposes," approved June 16, 1933 (Public No. 67, 73d Congress), and in order to provide for the orderly presentation of business and to coordinate inter-agency problems of organization and work of the new governmental agencies, therefore:
1. I hereby appoint a temporary Executive Council consisting of the following:

The President of the United States The Secretary of State

The Secretary of the Treasury The Secretary of War

The Attorney General The Postmaster General

The Secretary of the Navy The Secretary of the Interior

The Secretary of Agriculture The Secretary of Commerce

The Secretary of Labor The Director of the Budget

The Administrator of National Recovery

The Administrator of Agricultural Adjustment

The Administrator of Federal Emergency Relief

The Federal Coordinator of Transportation

The Governor of the Farm Credit Administration

The Chairman of the Board of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation

The Chairman of the Board of the Home Owners Loan Corporation

The Chairman of the Board of the Tennessee Valley Authority

The Director of Emergency Conservation Work

The Secretary to the President The Hon. L. W. Robert, Jr.,

Assistant Secretary of the Treasury The Executive Secretary
and such other members as the President may designate.
In the absence of the President, the senior Cabinet Member present shall preside at the meetings of this Executive Council, which shall be held each Tuesday at 2:00 o'clock, p.m., in the Cabinet Chamber of the White House.
2. I hereby appoint Frank C. Walker to exercise temporarily the office of Executive Secretary of the Executive Council, subject to such duties as may be prescribed him by the President.
3. The Executive Secretary is hereby authorized to purchase such necessary equipment, books and materials, and to employ such necessary personnel on a temporary basis, as may be approved by the President; and the Federal Emergency Administrator of Public Works is hereby directed to allot to the Executive Secretary the necessary funds for such disbursements as are hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the Director of the Budget.