Franklin D. Roosevelt
July 30, 1941

Executive Order 8840 Establishing the Office of Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs.
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes of the United States, and in order to define further the functions and duties of the Office for Emergency Management with respect to the unlimited national emergency declared by the President on May 27, 1941, and to provide for the development of commercial and cultural relations between the American Republics and thereby increasing the solidarity of this hemisphere and furthering the spirit of cooperation between the Americas in the interest of hemisphere defense, it is hereby ordered as follows:
1. There is established within the Office for Emergency Management of the Executive Office of the President the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs, at the head of which there shall be a Coordinator appointed by the President. The Coordinator shall discharge and perform his duties and responsibilities under the direction and supervision of the President. The Coordinator shall serve as such without compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary transportation, subsistence, and other expenses incidental to the performance of his duties.
2. Subject to such policies, regulations, and directions as the President may from time to time prescribe, the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs shall:
a. Serve as the center for the coordination of the cultural and commercial relations of the Nation affecting hemisphere defense.
b. Formulate and execute programs, in cooperation with the Department of State which, by effective use of governmental and private facilities in such fields as the arts and sciences, education and travel, the radio, the press, and the cinema, will further the national defense and strengthen the bonds between the Nations of the Western Hemisphere.
c. Formulate, recommend, and execute programs in the commercial and economic fields which, by the effective use of governmental and private facilities, will further the commercial well-being of the Western Hemisphere.
d. Assist in the coordination and carrying out of the purposes of Public Resolution No. 83 approved June 15, 1941, entitled "To authorize the Secretaries of War and of the Navy to assist the Governments of American Republics to increase their military and naval establishments, and for other purposes."
e. Review existing laws and recommend such new legislation as may be deemed essential to the effective realization of the basic cultural and commercial objectives of the Government's program of hemisphere solidarity.
f. Exercise and perform all powers and functions now or heretofore vested in the Office for Coordination of Commercial and Cultural Relations Between the American Republics, established by order of the Council of National Defense on August 16, 1940.
g. Keep the President informed with respect to progress made in carrying out this Order; and perform such other related duties as the President may from time to time assign or delegate to it.
3. In the study of problems and in the execution of programs, it shall be the policy of the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs to collaborate with and to utilize the facilities of existing departments and agencies which perform functions and activities affecting the cultural and commercial aspects of hemisphere defense. Such departments and agencies are requested to cooperate with the Coordinator in arranging for appropriate clearance of proposed policies and measures involving the commercial and cultural aspects of Inter-American affairs.
4. Within the limits of funds appropriated or allocated for purposes encompassed by this Order, the Coordinator may contract with and transfer funds to existing governmental agencies and institutions and may enter into contracts and agreements with individuals, educational, informational, commercial, scientific, and cultural institutions, associations, agencies, and industrial organizations, firms, and corporations.
5. The Coordinator is authorized and directed to take over and carry out the provisions of any contracts heretofore entered into by the Office for Coordination of Commercial and Cultural Relations Between the American Republics, established by order of the Council of National Defense on August 16, 1940. The Coordinator is further authorized to assume any obligations or responsibilities which have heretofore been undertaken by the said Office for and on behalf of the United States Government.
6. There is hereby established within the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs a Committee on Inter-American Affairs, consisting of the Coordinator as Chairman, one designee each from the Departments of State, Treasury, Agriculture, and Commerce, the President of the Export-Import Bank, and such additional representatives from other agencies and departments as may be designated by the heads of such departments or agencies at the request of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs. The Committee shall consider and correlate proposals with respect to the commercial, cultural, educational, and scientific aspects of hemisphere defense relations, and shall make recommendations to the appropriate Government departments and agencies.
7. The Coordinator may provide for the internal organization and management of the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs. The Coordinator shall obtain the President's approval for the establishment of the principal subdivisions of the Office and the appointment of the heads thereof. The Coordinator may appoint such committees as may be required for the conduct of the activities of his office.
8. Within the limits of such funds as may be appropriated to the Coordinator or as may be allocated to him by the President, the Coordinator may employ necessary personnel and make provisions for necessary supplies, facilities, and services. However, the Coordinator shall use such statistical, informational, fiscal, personnel, and other general business services and facilities as may be made available to him through the Office for Emergency Management.