Franklin D. Roosevelt
June 11, 1940

Request for Appropriations for Relief in War-torn Areas.
My dear Mr. Vice President:
World events have made it clear to the American people that in the interest of American defense it is necessary for us to engage in a greatly enlarged program of training and armament.
At the same time our deepest sympathy has gone out to the civilian populations of war-torn areas, and I believe that this sympathy should be expressed by a concrete example of our inherent and decent generosity.
Many millions of dollars have been given to the American Red Cross for relief purposes in Europe, but I feel that the Government itself should greatly add to the assistance that is now being given.
In the pending Relief Bill before the Congress we are making possible the expenditure of over one billion dollars for the relief of the needy unemployed in the United States. And in addition to this, large further sums are being spent from day to day by States and municipalities in the care of the needy who cannot be given employment on work relief projects.
In view of these large sums spent at home, I feel that the Congress would receive nation-wide support if it were to add an appropriation to the Relief Bill in the sum of at least fifty million dollars as a token of our deep-seated desire to help not only Americans but people who are destitute in other lands.
Clearly the greater part of the amount appropriated will be spent in the United States for the purchase and export of food materials- nearly all of which represent surplus in this country. These surpluses are due principally to the war situation in other lands. We have used and are using a part of these surpluses for distribution to our own needy families. But there is still an excess which tends, incidentally, to depreciate the prices which American farmers receive for their products. Further export of these surplus food products will help the economics of our very large agricultural population.
There are other things which the destitute refugees need across the seas- medicines and medical and nursing aid; bandages, surgical dressings, hospital garments and even cots and blankets and sheets; ambulances; clothing against the winter which will be upon them soon; safeguards against epidemics which could well spread throughout the world.
The funds of the Red Cross will be needed and used for these purposes. The appropriation I am suggesting will supplement their efforts.
The appropriation should, I think, be kept in somewhat elastic form because it is clear that at this time it is impossible to forecast either the exact needs or the exact methods of meeting them.
I call attention to the fact that such an appropriation in no way lightens the burden which the American Red Cross has already assumed. It is necessary that the American Red Cross continue its splendid service for wounded and sick soldiers and civilians. An appropriation by the Congress will supplement the work of the Red Cross to meet the many additional crying needs of the civilian populations who have been driven from their homes.
Very sincerely yours,
The Honorable

The Vice President of the United States,

The United States Senate.