Franklin D. Roosevelt
June 07, 1935

Message to Congress on Transportation.
To the Congress:
It is high time to deal with the Nation's transportation as a single, unified problem. For many years in the past transportation meant mainly railroads. But the rise of new forms of transportation, great expenditures of Government funds for the development of waterways and for the building of great highways and the development of invention within the railroad system itself, have enlarged the problem far beyond that conception which dominated most of our past legislation on the subject. In some instances the Government has helped a little. In others it has retarded. In still others it has given special assistance from time to time—in many instances without rhyme or reason—in all instances without considering each aspect of the problem in the light of all the others. It is small wonder that in a transportation picture so confused, the public has been inadequately served.
I have from time to time, in this session, addressed the Congress as to the necessity of various forms of Government aid and regulation of transportation. I now wish to draw together and supplement these various suggestions for the consideration of the Congress in this session.
In the railroad field there has been a growing recognition of the necessity for reorganization and coordination. To that end there was created the office of Federal Coordinator of Transportation. The Coordinator has considered various ways of effecting economies through the physical coordination of railway facilities and services, and, in addition, has studied and made suggestions for legislative measures covering both the railroads and other forms of transportation.
Another type of reorganization necessary for the sound and healthy recovery of our railroad system is financial. Many of our railroads are in a sound financial condition. Others are in need of reorganization. To enable necessary financial reorganizations to be effected inexpensively and promptly the Congress passed, two years ago, certain amendments to the Federal Bankruptcy Act. Shortcomings in this legislation have appeared which have prevented an efficient and extensive use of it. In order to correct these shortcomings the Coordinator has recommended certain amendments which are now before the Congress for action. Various differences of opinion as to these amendments are rapidly being adjusted and it is my hope that this legislation may be promptly enacted.
I have already recommended to the Congress my views with regard to the relations that should exist between the Federal Government and air carriers. Legislation has been introduced for the purpose of carrying out these recommendations. I am in general accord with the substance of this legislation although I still maintain, as I indicated in my message on that subject, that a separate commission need not be established to effectuate the purposes of such legislation. Air transportation should be brought into a proper relation to other forms of transportation by subjecting it to regulation by the same agency.
A bill for the regulation of highway motor carriers has passed the Senate and is now before the House of Representatives. The practical unanimity with which the Senate passed this bill convinces me of the extent to which all of the difficult adjustments among the interests concerned were made and I recommend its early passage by the House.
Another bill for the regulation of intercoastal and coastwise trade and of some of the inland waterway carriers prepared by the Coordinator has been introduced and is before the Congress for action. I recommend that this bill be considered by the appropriate committees and pressed to early passage. I can see no reason why the responsibility for the regulation of intercoastal, coastwise and inland waterways should not be vested in the Interstate Commerce Commission, with proper provision for the departmentalizing of the work of the Commission.
It is my hope that the Interstate Commerce Commission may, with the addition of the new duties that I have indicated, ultimately become a Federal Transportation Commission with comprehensive powers. It had been my intention to recommend this strongly to this session of the Congress, but the time remaining seems to preclude the discussions necessary for such changes. Such a reorganization should not be delayed, however, beyond the second session of the 74th Congress.
The efforts toward the coordination of the railroads and the general improvement of transportation conditions which were begun by the Emergency Railroad Transportation Act of 1933, should proceed, and I recommend that the Act and the office of Coordinator be extended for at least another year.