Franklin D. Roosevelt
June 29, 1933

Informal Remarks Delivered at Campobello Island.
I think that I can only address you as my old friends of Campobello—old and new. I was figuring this morning on the passage of time and I remembered that I was brought here because I was teething forty-nine years ago. I have been coming for many months almost every year until about twelve years ago, when there was a gap.
It seems to me that memory is a very wonderful thing, because this morning when we were beginning to come out of the fog off Quoddy Head, the boys on the lookout in the bow called out "land ahead." Nevertheless, memory kept me going full speed ahead because I knew the place was the Lubec Narrows.
That was one of the things I learned up here, one of the things I learned, for instance, from Ed Lank, from John Calder, and from old Captain Mitchell who, by the way, gave me a few minutes ago a very delightful photograph of my father's first old boat away back in the early nineties. I am mighty glad to have it.
I was thinking also, as I came through the Narrows and saw the line of fishing boats and the people on the wharves, both here at Welch Pool and also in Eastport, that this reception here is probably the finest example of friendship between Nations-permanent friendship between Nations—that we can possibly have.
I was glad that I had with me the American delegate to the Disarmament Conference in Geneva, Mr. Norman Davis, because he will go back to Geneva and will be able to tell them that he has seen with his own eyes what a border-line without fortifications means between two great Nations.
I am very happy to have had this very wonderful reception, all of this kindness from the Governor of the Province of New Brunswick and also from the Dominion Governor, and especially a very delightful telegram of welcome from the Governor General of Canada, the representative of His Majesty, the King.
I hope and am very confident that if peace continues in this world and that if the other Nations of the world follow the very good example of the United States and Canada, I shall be able to come back here for a holiday during the next three years.