Franklin D. Roosevelt
June 26, 1941

Message to Congress on a Defense Housing Program.
To the Congress:
The Act of October 14, 1940 (Public, No. 849, known as the "Lanham Act"), as amended and supplemented, has to date authorized a public housing program of $300,000,000 for defense needs. Appropriations have been made to the full extent of the authorization, and practically all of the funds appropriated have been allocated to projects.
I am convinced, from information presented to me by heads of interested departments and agencies of the Government, that there remain further needs which cannot be provided for except by the enlargement of the authorization under this Act. It is normally exceedingly difficult to predict housing needs, and during the present emergency accurate prediction is well-nigh impossible by reason of rapid expansion of, and frequent necessary changes in, the national defense program which defense housing must serve. Data have been presented to me which indicate the possibility that the Government should be prepared to undertake the construction of at least 125,000 additional defense homes between now and July 1, 1942. It is thought best, however, to limit the additional program to $300,000,000 at this time, which will permit the construction of approximately 75,000 houses to fill the most urgent present needs.
The effect of the national defense program has not yet been fully registered on the housing market. Some new plants heretofore brought into the defense program have not yet reached full capacity and many new facilities yet remain to be constructed. It has been recognized that increased subcontracting and curtailment of certain kinds of production for civilian use will reduce the need for new housing to some extent. However, in many cases new plants or increases of existing plants will of necessity be located in areas not affected by these factors. In practically every case where existing plants are increased, those workers who must be brought into the area will require a proportionately larger number of new houses, because those vacancies which were previously available have generally been absorbed.
The importance of adequate housing in the defense program should be self-evident. Without housing for workers, industries producing ships, planes, tanks, and other defense materials cannot function to full capacity.
I, therefore, suggest to the Congress the enactment of legislation providing an increase from $300,000,000 to $600,000,000 in the authorization contained in the Act of October 14, 1940, as amended.
In view of the urgency of this matter, I suggest that it receive the early consideration of the Congress.