Franklin D. Roosevelt
March 01, 1937

Message to Congress on a Sugar Quota System.
To the Congress:
The expiration on December 31, 1937, of the quota provisions of the Jones-Costigan Act and Public Resolution No. 109 of June 19, 1936, and the existence of the public problems which have arisen as a result of discontinuance of the processing tax on sugar and benefit payments to sugar beet and sugar-cane producers, make it desirable that the Congress consider the enactment of new legislation with respect to sugar. The Jones-Costigan Act has been useful and effective and it is my belief that its principles should again be made effective.
I therefore recommend to the Congress the enactment of the sugar quota system, and its necessary complements, which will restore the operation of the principles on which the Jones-Costigan Act was based. In order to accomplish this purpose adequate safeguards would be required to protect the interests of each group concerned. As a safeguard for the protection of consumers I recommend that provision be made to prevent any possible restriction of the supply of sugar that would result in prices to consumers in excess of those reasonably necessary, together with conditional payments to producers, to maintain the domestic industry as a whole and to make the production of sugar beets and sugar-cane as profitable as the production of the principal other agricultural crops. In order to protect the expansion of markets for American exports, I recommend that no decrease be made in the share of other countries in the total quotas.
It is also highly desirable to continue the policy, which was inherent in the Jones-Costigan Act, of effectuating the principle that an industry which desires the protection afforded by a quota system, or a tariff, should be expected to guarantee that it will be a good employer. I recommend, therefore, that the prevention of child labor, and the payment of wages of not less than minimum standards, be included among the conditions for receiving a federal payment.
I recommend that adequate provision be made to protect the right of both new and old producers of small acreages of sugar beets and sugar-cane to an equitable share of the benefits offered by the program. In this connection I suggest also that you consider the advisability of providing for payments at rates for family-size farms higher than those applicable to large operating units.
Quotas influence the price of sugar through the control of supply; consequently, under a quota regulation of the supply of sugar, a tax may be levied without causing any adverse effect, over a period of time, on the price paid by consumers.
I recommend to the Congress the enactment of an excise tax at the rate of not less than .75 cent per pound of sugar, raw value. I am definitely advised that such a tax would not increase the average cost of sugar to consumers. An excise tax of this amount would yield approximately $100,000,000 per annum to the Treasury of the United States, which would make the total revenue from sugar more nearly commensurate with that obtained during the period 1922-1929. It is also estimated that the total income of foreign countries from the sale of sugar in the United States under the quota system would not be less than that obtained during 1935, and, like the total income of domestic sugar producers, it can be expected to increase in future years as our consumption requirements expand.
In considering the enactment of any tax the Congress has regard for its social and economic effects as well as its ability to raise revenue. The social and economic effects of an adequate excise tax on sugar are so important to the welfare of the various groups affected as to constitute a necessary complement to the quota system. For this reason I recommend that neither the quotas nor the tax should be operative alone.