Franklin D. Roosevelt
March 15, 1933

Proclamation 2041—Appointing William H. Woodin Director General of Railroads
By the President of the United States of America
A Proclamation
WhereasOgden L. Mills has tendered his resignation as Director General of Railroads; and
Whereassuch resignation has been accepted effective upon the qualification of his successor;
Now, Therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt,President of the United States of America, under and by virtue of the power and authority so vested in me under the Transportation Act of 1920, the unrepealed provisions of the Federal Control Act of March 21, 1918, and the act entitled "AN ACT Making appropriations for the support of the Army for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and seventeen, and for other purposes," approved August 29, 1916, and of all other powers me hereto enabling, do hereby appoint, effective the 15th day of March, 1933, William H. Woodin, Secretary of the Treasury, to be Director General of Railroads in the stead of the said Ogden L. Mills, and do hereby delegate to and continue and confirm in him all powers and authority heretofore granted to and now possessed by the said Ogden L. Mills as Director General of Railroads; and do hereby authorize and direct the said William H. Woodin or his successor in office, until otherwise provided by proclamation of the President or by act of Congress, either personally or through such divisions, agencies, or persons as he may authorize, to exercise and perform, as fully in all respects as the President is authorized to do, all and singular the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon me by the said unrepealed provisions of the Federal Control Act of March 21, 1918, and the said Transportation Act of February 28, 1920, except the designation of the agent under section 206 thereof.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.
Doneat the City of Washington this 15th day of March, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-three, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and fifty-seventh.

FRANKLIN D ROOSEVELT
By the President:
CORDELL HULL
Secretary of State.