Franklin D. Roosevelt
March 10, 1933

Message to Congress on Economies in Government.
To the Senate and House of Representatives:
THE NATION is deeply gratified by the immediate response given yesterday by the Congress to the necessity for drastic action to restore and improve our banking system. A like necessity exists with respect to the finances of the Government itself which requires equally courageous, frank and prompt action.
For three long years the Federal Government has been on the road toward bankruptcy.
For the fiscal year 1931, the deficit was $462,000,000.
For the fiscal year 1932, it was $2,472,000,000.
For the fiscal year 1933, it will probably exceed $ 1,200,000,000.
For the fiscal year 1934, based on the appropriation bills passed by the last Congress and the estimated revenues, the deficit will probably exceed $1,000,000,000 unless immediate action is taken.
Thus we shall have piled up an accumulated deficit of $5,000,000,000.
With the utmost seriousness I point out to the Congress the profound effect of this fact upon our national economy. It has contributed to the recent collapse of our banking structure. It has accentuated the stagnation of the economic life of our people. It has added to the ranks of the unemployed. Our Government's house is not in order and for many reasons no effective action has been taken to restore it to order.
Upon the unimpaired credit of the United States Government rest the safety of deposits, the security of insurance policies, the activity of industrial enterprises, the value of our agricultural products and the availability of employment. The credit of the United States Government definitely affects those fundamental human values. It, therefore, becomes our first concern to make secure the foundation. National recovery depends upon it.
Too often in recent history liberal governments have been wrecked on rocks of loose fiscal policy. We must avoid this danger.
It is too late for a leisurely approach to this problem. We must not wait to act several months hence. The emergency is accentuated by the necessity of meeting great refunding operations this spring.
We must move with a direct and resolute purpose now. The members of the Congress and I are pledged to immediate economy.
I am, therefore, assuming that you and I are in complete agreement as to the urgent necessity, and my constitutional duty is to advise you as to the methods for obtaining drastic retrenchment at this time.
I am not speaking to you in general terms. I am pointing out a definite road.
The last Congress enacted legislation relating to the reorganization and elimination of executive agencies, but the economies thus to be effected are small when viewed in the light of the great deficit for the next fiscal year. They will not meet the pressing needs of our credit situation. Provision for additional saving is essential, and therefore I am asking the Congress today for new legislation laying down broad principles for the granting of pensions and other veterans' benefits, and giving to the Executive the authority to prescribe the administrative details. We are unanimous in upholding the duty of the Government to care for those who suffer in its defense and for their widows and orphans. The application, however, of this great principle to large numbers of people involves complications so great that it is almost impossible to draw legislation with sufficient flexibility to provide substantial justice in varying situations. The proposed legislation states the principles and, limited by them, permits the Executive to draw the lines of differentiation necessary to justice.
In accord with the same purpose of substantial justice I request also the enactment of legislation relating to the salaries of civil and military employees of the Government. This would repeal the existing furlough plan, substituting therefor a general principle and authorizing the Executive to make application of this principle. The proper legislative function is to fix the amount of expenditure, the means by which it is to be raised and the general principles under which the expenditures are to be made. The details of expenditure, particularly in view of the great present emergency, can be more wisely and equitably administered through the Executive. The flexibility of the measures which I am proposing is not only practical but proceeds along the road of constitutional government.
Such economies which can be made will, it is true, affect some of our citizens; but the failure to make them will affect all of our citizens. The very stability of our Government itself is concerned and when that is concerned the benefits of some must be subordinated to the needs of all.
When a great danger threatens our basic security it is my duty to advise the Congress of the way to preserve it. In so doing I must be fair not only to the few but to the many. It is in this spirit that I appeal to you. If the Congress chooses to vest me with this responsibility it will be exercised in a spirit of justice to all, of sympathy to those who are in need and of maintaining inviolate the basic welfare of the United States.
I ask that this legislation go into effect at once, without even waiting for the beginning of the next fiscal year. I give you assurance that if this is done there is reasonable prospect that within a year the income of the Government will be sufficient to cover the expenditures of the Government.