Franklin D. Roosevelt
March 11, 1942

Transmittal to Congress of a Report on Lend-Lease Operations.
The President of the Senate,

The Speaker of the House of Representatives:
I am transmitting herewith to the Congress a report on the first year of lend-lease operations.
One year ago, in passing the Lend-Lease Act, the American people dedicated their material resources to the defeat of the Axis. We knew then that to strengthen those who were fighting the Axis was to strengthen the United States. We recognized then the lesson that has since been hammered home to us by Axis treachery and Axis arms—that the rulers of Germany and Japan would never stop until they were thrown from power or America was forced to its knees.
Now that we have had to dedicate our manpower as well as our material resources to the defeat of the Axis, the American people know the wisdom of the step they took one year ago today. Had not the Nations fighting aggression been strengthened and sustained— their armed forces with weapons, their factories with materials, their people with food—our presently grave position might indeed be desperate. But for the continued resistance of these steadfast peoples, the full force of the enemy might now be battering at our own ports and gateways.
Lend-lease has given us experience with which to fight the aggressor. Lend-lease has expanded our productive capacity for the building of guns and tanks and planes and ships. The weapons we made and shipped have been tested in actual combat on a dozen battlefields, teaching lessons of untold value.
Lend-lease is now a prime mechanism through which the United Nations are pooling their entire resources. Under the Lend-Lease Act, we send our arms and materials to the places where they can best be used in the battle against the Axis. Through reciprocal lend-lease provisions we receive arms and materials from the other United Nations when they can best be used by us.
The war can only be won by contact with the enemies, and by attack upon them. That takes time, for the United Nations need more and still more equipment and transportation. Success will come dearly, at the price of defeats and losses. The offensive that the United Nations must and will drive into the heart of the Axis will take the entire strength that we possess.
For that combined strength we can thank the decision we took a year ago today. With that combined strength we go forward along the steep road to victory.