Franklin D. Roosevelt
March 22, 1939

Remarks to the Ambassador of Venezuela Upon Presentation of Credentials.
Mr. Ambassador:
It is most gratifying to me to receive from you the Letter whereby your distinguished President, General Eleazar Lopez Contreras, accredits you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the United States of Venezuela to the Government of the United States of America.
Consistent with your statements, the raising of our diplomatic missions in Caracas and Washington to the grade of Embassy is an added indication and a natural result of the increasingly important relationship between our two countries. It is an especial pleasure for me to mark this growth in our commercial and cultural relations by receiving as the first Ambassador of Venezuela to this country one who has sincerely interpreted the people of Venezuela and the United States to each other.
As you indicate, Mr. Ambassador, the inter-American spirit of cooperation which has long prevailed in our relations has undergone a marked development in recent years, and I am confident that the Government and the people of the United States of America will continue whole-heartedly to support the principles of mutual respect, equitable dealing and democratic cooperation.
You may be sure that it will be the constant desire of the officials of the Government of the United States, as it has been in the past, to assist you in every possible way in your active efforts to strengthen the bonds between the Governments and peoples of Venezuela and the United States. It will, moreover, continue to be a source of personal gratification to me to collaborate with you in carrying out the functions of your high position.
I thank you sincerely for your kind references to the satisfaction you have derived from your previous service in this country, and I hope you will gain increasing personal satisfaction from carrying out the duties of your new and elevated position.
I am likewise deeply appreciative of your eminent President's friendly wishes for the well-being and prosperity of the United States of America and for my personal happiness. Please transmit to His Excellency, President Lopez Contreras, my own best wishes for the growing prosperity of Venezuela and for his own secure well-being.