Franklin D. Roosevelt
May 01, 1940

Greeting to the Convention of the American Red Cross.
My dear Mr. Davis:
I regret exceedingly that I shall not be able to attend the opening session of the annual Red Cross convention, but it gives me great pleasure to send, through you, my cordial greetings to the national officers and the chapter leaders.
As President of the Red Cross, I wish to express my pride in the organization and my gratitude to the thousands of volunteers who serve it throughout the country. Experience has given us complete confidence in its prompt and efficient service in all domestic crises. We have constant reason to be thankful that there is no city, town or village in our nation without its own Red Cross chapter or branch, linking so many millions of our people in the common cause of neighborly service.
A year ago when I spoke to the delegates at the convention, the world was disturbed by rumors of impending war. Since then, that war, so long dreaded, has come to add new and grave responsibilities to the great International Red Cross organization, founded seventy-six years ago to bring mercy to the battlefield.
The bombing of helpless and unprotected civilians is a tragedy which has aroused the horror of all mankind. I recall with pride that the United States consistently has taken the lead in urging that this inhuman practice be prohibited. I am glad that the International Red Cross, at its meeting in London in 1938, urged that joint steps be taken by the governments to prevent such outrages in the future.
I regret, however, that the governments have not acted on this Red Cross proposal. As for the United States Government, I can assure you of my strongest recommendation for adherence to any international convention which will give this protection to civilian and non-combatant populations.
It was natural that the American people should turn to their Red Cross as the agency through which to express sympathy for the suffering men, women and children of the countries engaged in this terrible struggle. As Chairman you have kept me informed of the measures taken to expedite aid whenever the need has been greatest.
I know that the practical measures of relief the American Red Cross has given-medicines, hospital supplies, clothing—have gone to aid the sick and wounded of the armies, as required by Red Cross treaties, but to an even greater extent, this merciful help has been given to the women and children, the aged and infirm civilians whose suffering in modern warfare surpasses anything we could earlier have believed possible.
I am confident that whatever may be the problems which intensification of warfare may bring, the American people will respond to any appeal for funds when the Red Cross deems it necessary to call upon them for additional aid. By such response we can aid in sustaining the spirit and morale of those in distress abroad until the happy day we all pray for, when hostilities shall cease.
Very sincerely yours,

Honorable Norman H. Davis,

Chairman, American National Red Cross,

Washington, D.C.