Franklin D. Roosevelt
May 22, 1934

Message to Congress on Silver Policy.
To the Congress:
On January 11, 1934, I recommended to the Congress legislation which was promptly enacted under the title, "The Gold Reserve Act of 1934." This Act vested in the United States Government the custody and control of our stocks of gold as a reserve for our paper currency and as a medium of settling international balances. It set up a stabilization fund for the control of foreign exchange in the interests of our people, and certain amendments were added to facilitate the acquisition of silver.
As stated in my message to the Congress, this legislation was recommended as a step in improving our financial and monetary system. Its enactment has laid a foundation on which we are organizing a currency system that will be both sound and adequate. It is a long step forward, but only a step.
As a part of the larger objective, some things have been clear. One is that we should move forward as rapidly as conditions permit in broadening the metallic base of our monetary system and in stabilizing the purchasing and debt-paying power of our money on a more equitable level. Another is that we should not neglect the value of an increased use of silver in improving our monetary system. Since 1929 that has been obvious.
Some measures for making a greater use of silver in the public interest are appropriate for independent action by us. On others, international cooperation should be sought.
Of the former class is that of increasing the proportion of silver in the abundant metallic reserves back of our paper currency. This policy was initiated by the Proclamation of December 21, 1933, bringing our current domestic production of silver into the Treasury, as well as placing this Nation among the first to carry out the agreement on silver which we sought and secured at the London Conference. We have since acquired other silver in the interest of stabilization of foreign exchange and the development of a broader metallic base for our currency. We seek to remedy a maladjustment of our currency.
In further aid of this policy, it would be helpful to have legislation broadening the authority for the further acquisition and monetary use of silver.
I, therefore, recommend legislation at the present session, declaring it to be the policy of the United States to increase the amount of silver in our monetary stocks with the ultimate objective of having and maintaining one-fourth of their monetary value in silver and three-fourths in gold.
The Executive Authority should be authorized and directed to make the purchases of silver necessary to attain this ultimate objective.
The authority to purchase present accumulations of silver in this country should be limited to purchases at not in excess of fifty cents per ounce.
The Executive Authority should be enabled, should circumstances require, to take over present surpluses of silver in this country not required for industrial uses on payment of just compensation, and to regulate imports, exports and other dealings in monetary silver.
There should be a tax of at least 50 percent on the profits accruing from dealing in silver.
We can proceed with this program of increasing our store of silver for use as a part of the metallic reserves for our paper currency without seriously disturbing adjustments in world trade. However, because of the great world supply of silver and its use in varying forms by the world's population, concerted action by all Nations, or at least a large group of Nations, is necessary if a permanent measure of value, including both gold and silver, is eventually to be made a world standard. To arrive at that point, we must seek every possibility for world agreement, although it may turn out that this Nation will ultimately have to take such independent action on this phase of the matter as its interests require.
The success of the London Conference in consummating an international agreement on silver, which has now been ratified by all the Governments concerned, makes such further agreement worth seeking. The ebb and flow of values in almost all parts of the world have created many points of pressure for readjustments of internal and international standards. At no time since the efforts of this Nation to secure international agreement on silver began in 1878, have conditions been more favorable for making progress along this line.
Accordingly, I have begun to confer with some of our neighbors in regard to the use of both silver and gold, preferably on a coordinated basis, as a standard of monetary value. Such an agreement would constitute an important step forward toward a monetary unit of value more equitable and stable in its purchasing and debt-paying power.