Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 07, 1933

Message on the Dedication of the Marshal de Rochambeau Monument.
In the calendar of history there are days not like other days. Whenever we commemorate in the United States the decisive action of the War of Independence, we are both happy and proud to recall that more than one French regiment also has the right to bear on its colors the name of Yorktown. In the course of time American regiments have won the right to bear on their own colors the names of towns in France. But it was Yorktown that first set the seal on this long association; nor are we the last to recognize that the honors of Yorktown were in no small part due to the character and genius of the future Marshal of France who commanded our allies of 1781.
"As long as liberty shall be considered of value, this event must perpetuate our gratitude, while it associates your fame with that of General Washington. To preserve in troops far removed from their own country the strictest discipline, and to convert into esteem and affection deep and ancient prejudices, was reserved for you; and this praise is all your own." Thus wrote the people of Maryland in 1783 to Lieutenant General Count de Rochambeau, on the eve of his sailing from Annapolis. He was General Washington's senior in years and in military experience. A smaller-minded man could never have adapted himself to the unified command of Newport and Yorktown. But Count de Rochambeau possessed, above force, wisdom, and tact, the simplicity of greatness. The two generals took each other's counsel, they made the most of their immortal opportunity; they became friends. As long as General Washington lived they continued to write to each other, with a warmth which one does not always 'expect of warriors.
Marshal de Rochambeau is one of the glories of France; but we of the United States also claim our part in him. I feel it a duty and an honor to speak for my country in paying tribute to the memory of the great man and famous soldier whom you so fittingly commemorate.