Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 15, 1935

Statements with the Prime Minister of Canada on the Canadian Trade Agreement.
By the President:
The Trade Agreement which has just been signed between the United States and Canada places the trade relations between the two countries on a basis of mutual agreement for the first time since 1866. I am happy to have a part in removing this anomaly in the relations between two countries which are united by so many bonds of friendship and common heritage.
The signing of this Agreement marks the reversal of the trend of the last two decades toward undue and unnecessary trade barriers between our two countries. I am confident that this constructive step will contribute greatly to the economic recovery of both the United States and Canada.
By the Prime Minister:
The kindly words and sentiments to which you, Mr. President, have just given expression, will be warmly welcomed by His Majesty the King in whose name I have had the honor to sign the Trade Treaty which has just been concluded between the United States and Canada.
They will, I know, be deeply appreciated by the people of Canada.
May I say, Mr. Secretary, that I very cordially endorse all that you have said of the mutual advantages likely to flow to our respective countries from the terms of the Treaty?
On behalf of Canada, I heartily reciprocate the sentiments of international good-will you have so generously expressed.
I believe with you that the signature of this Agreement is witness of the joint intention of the Governments of the United States and Canada to give rapid effect to our policies in a practical manner. At last our formal trade relations have been brought into harmony with the underlying realities of public and private friendship between our two peoples. The Agreement will, I am confident, confer substantial benefits alike on the producers and consumers of both countries, while safeguarding with great care every essential interest. I feel sure that its value will be shown beyond question by a marked increase in commerce within the next few months. This undoubtedly will help both countries to make more rapid progress toward complete economic recovery.
Nor will this agreement benefit North America alone. All the world will gain from greater trade on this continent.
Nor will its benefits be confined to trade. To an anxious and troubled world we hope that there will be opened to the Nations, by the force of our example, vistas of a surer path to progress and a more lasting road to peace.