Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 22, 1933

Exchange of Letters between the President and Mr. Litvinov.
Washington, November 22, 1933
My dear Mr. President:

On leaving the United States I feel it a great pleasure respectfully to convey to you my feelings of high esteem as well as gratitude for the many tokens of attention and friendship you have been good enough to show me during my stay in Washington.
I also wish hereby to thank the whole Executive and its various organs for their courtesies and cares.
I avail myself of this opportunity to express once more my firm conviction that the official linking of our two countries by the exchange of notes between you, Mr. President, and myself will be of great benefit to our two countries and will also be conducive to the strengthening and preservation of peace between Nations toward which our countries are sincerely striving. I believe that their joint efforts will add a creative factor in international affairs which will be beneficial to mankind.
Believe me to be, my dear Mr. President, with the best wishes for the well being of yourself, your family and of your great country,

Yours very sincerely,
MAXIM LITVINOV

Peoples' Commissar for Foreign Affairs,

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Warm Springs, Georgia, November 23, 1933

My dear Mr. Litvinov:

I thank you for your most courteous letter of November 22nd, 1933. It has been a great personal pleasure to me to meet you and I trust that some day I shall again have the pleasure of welcoming you in America. On your return to your country I hope that you will convey President Kalinin my greetings and best wishes.
I am profoundly gratified that our conversations should have resulted in the restoration of normal relations between our peoples and I trust that these relations will grow closer and more intimate with each passing year. The cooperation of our Governments in the great work of preserving peace should be the cornerstone of an enduring friendship.
I am sorry that owing to my absence from Washington I am unable in person to say good-bye to you and to wish you a safe and pleasant journey; but I assure you that you carry with you my warmest personal regards.

Yours very sincerely,
FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT
