Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 17, 1942

Statement on Temporary Political Arrangements in Africa.
I have accepted General Eisenhower's political arrangements made for the time being in North Africa and Western Africa.
I thoroughly understand and approve the feeling in the United States and Great Britain, and among all the other United Nations, that in view of the history of the past two years no permanent arrangement should be made with Admiral Darlan. People in the United Nations likewise would never understand the recognition of a reconstituting of the Vichy Government in France, or in any French territory.
We are opposed to Frenchmen who support Hitler and the Axis. No one in our Army has any authority to discuss the future government of France or the French Empire.
The future French Government will be established not by any individual in metropolitan France or overseas, but by the French people themselves, after they have been set free by the victory of the United Nations.
The present temporary arrangement in North and West Africa is only a temporary expedient, justified solely by the stress of battle.
The present temporary arrangement has accomplished two military objectives. The first was to save American and British lives on the one hand, and French lives on the other.
The second was the vital factor of time. The temporary arrangement has made it possible to avoid a mopping up period in Algiers and Morocco, which might have taken a month or two to consummate. Such a period would have delayed the concentration' for the attack from the West on Tunis, and we hope on Tripoli.
Every day of delay in the current operations would have enabled the Germans and Italians to build up a strong resistance, to dig in, and make a huge operation on our part essential before we could win. Here again many more lives will be saved under the present speedy offensive than if we had to delay it for a month or more.
It will also be noted that French troops under the command of General Giraud have already been in action against the enemy in Tunisia, fighting by the side of American and British soldiers for the liberation of their country.
Admiral Darlan's proclamation assisted in making a mopping up period unnecessary. Temporary arrangements made with Admiral Darlan apply without exception to the current local situation only.
I have requested the liberation of all persons in North Africa who have been imprisoned because they opposed the efforts of the Nazis to dominate the world; and I have asked for the abrogation of all laws and decrees inspired by Nazi Governments or Nazi ideologists. Reports indicate the French of North Africa are subordinating all political questions to the formation of a common front against the common enemy.