Franklin D. Roosevelt
October 30, 1933

Statement on an Agreement to Settle the Labor Dispute in the Captive Mines.
Substantial agreement was reached today between the President, General Hugh S. Johnson and the captive mine owners on the one hand and by the President, General Johnson and the United Mine Workers on the other hand.
This agreement provides a basis for the immediate reemployment of thousands of coal miners who are now idle if the following measures are put into effect:
Every mine which has an outlet for its product should be reopened and employees working when the mine last operated put back to work without any discrimination as to membership in any labor organization.
The check-off is conceded. A man may assign a deduction from his pay to whomever he desires.
The existing Appalachian agreement between the commercial mine operators and the United Mine Workers will fix the hours, wages and working conditions under which the men will go back to work and this will be posted at every mine.
A formal agreement which shall contain terms and conditions at least as favorable as the Appalachian agreement will be made between the captive mine operators and the representatives of their employees selected as follows:
When after the opening of any mine, in the opinion of the National Labor Board, orderly conditions have been restored and the protection of men working is assured, an election will be held under the exclusive regulation and direction of the National Labor Board and representatives will then be chosen for collective bargaining.
Such representatives may or may not be members of any labor organization and any officer, national, State or local of the United Mine Workers of America may be elected, and if elected the operators agree to negotiate with him to a conclusion on the following principles:
The representatives chosen by a majority will be given an immediate conference and separate conferences will be held with any representatives of a substantial minority. If no agreement with the majority representatives is reached in ten days the controversy will be immediately submitted by both parties to the National Labor Board for decision and both parties will agree to abide by the decision.