Franklin D. Roosevelt
September 17, 1942

Executive Order 9247—TRANSFERRING CERTAIN EMPLOYMENT SERVICE AND TRAINING FUNCTIONS TO THE WAR MANPOWER COMMISSION
EXECUTIVE ORDER 9247
TRANSFERRING CERTAIN EMPLOYMENT SERVICE AND TRAINING FUNCTIONS TO THE WAR MANPOWER COMMISSION
September 17, 1942
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the First War Powers Act, 1941, and for the purpose of enabling the Chairman of the War Manpower Commission more effectively to carry out the responsibility vested in him by Executive Order No. 9139, dated April 18, 1942, of assuring the most effective mobilization and utilization of the national manpower, it is hereby ordered as follows:
1. The following agencies, functions, duties, and powers are transferred to the War Manpower Commission in the Office for Emergency Management of the Executive Office of the President and shall be administered under the supervision and direction of the Chairman of the Commission:
(a) The United States Employment Service and all functions, duties, and powers of the Social Security Board in the Federal Security Agency relating to employment service.
(b) The National Youth Administration in the Federal Security Agency, and its functions, duties, and powers.
(c) The Apprenticeship Training Service in the Office of the Federal Security Administrator, and its functions, duties, and powers, including those relating to the program to encourage apprentice training in national defense industries.
(d) The Training Within Industry Service in the Office of the Federal Security Administrator, and its functions, duties, and powers.
The Apprenticeship Training Service and the National Youth Administration shall be preserved as organizational entities within the War Manpower Commission.
2. The following functions, duties, and powers are transferred to the Chairman of the War Manpower Commission:
(a) All functions, duties, and powers of the Federal Security Administrator relating to the administration of any agency or function transferred by paragraph 1 of this order.
(b) All functions, duties, and powers of the Federal Security Administrator relating to the following matters administered by the Office of Education: loans to students in technical and professional fields (national defense); education and training, defense workers (national defense); and visual aids for war training (national defense).
3. All records and property (including office equipment, contracts, agreements, and leased office space) used primarily in the administration of any agency, function, duty, or power transferred by this order, and all personnel used primarily in the administration of such agencies, functions, duties, and powers (including officers whose chief duties relate to such administration) are transferred to the War Manpower Commission for use in the administration of the agencies, functions, duties, and powers transferred by this order. So much of the unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, or other funds available for the use of any agency in the exercise of any function, duty, or power transferred by this order or for the use of the head of any agency in the exercise of any function, duty, or power so transferred, as the Director of the Bureau of the Budget shall determine, shall be transferred to the War Manpower Commission, for use in connection with the exercise of functions, duties, and powers so transferred. In determining the amounts to be transferred, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget may include an amount to provide for the liquidation of obligations incurred against such appropriations, allocations, or other funds prior to the transfer.
4. In order to maintain, to the maximum extent consistent with the effective prosecution of the war, the essential coordination and integration of public employment service and unemployment compensation functions, and to avoid any necessity for establishing duplicate public employment office facilities, the Chairman of the War Manpower Commission is directed to provide for making available to agencies charged with the administration of unemployment compensation laws, such services, information, and facilities by the United States Employment Service and its public employment offices as the Chairman of the War Manpower Commission finds will not be inconsistent with the effective prosecution of the war and as the Social Security Board finds necessary for the proper and efficient administration of such unemployment compensation laws.
FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

THE WHITE HOUSE,

September 17, 1942.
Exec. Order No. 9247, 7 FR 7379, 1942 WL 4215 (Pres.)