Franklin D. Roosevelt
September 30, 1936

Welcome to the Delegates to the Conference on the Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute
IN the agreement signed at Lima on July 6, 1936, by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru and the Minister of Ecuador to Peru for the purpose of making operative the provision of the protocol of June 21, 1924, it is stated that these two great Republics, throughout the course of the long discussion of their boundary controversy, have never faltered in their determination to settle this boundary question by pacific means and have ever been confident of their ability to arrive at a complete and permanent solution of the controversy.
It is in that spirit that the delegations of Ecuador and Peru meet in Washington today. I welcome you to the capital of my country, which shares with your countries the conviction that disputes between Nations, when the will for agreement exists, can always be resolved by the peaceful methods of negotiation, conciliation or arbitration.
Within the past few years several boundary disputes in this hemisphere have been settled by peaceful means. Two other American Republics at the present time are giving clear evidence of their faith in and adherence to this procedure. These are matters for legitimate pride on the part of the Nations of the New World. It is my sincere hope, which I am confident will be fulfilled, that another important chapter in this inspiring record may be written by the delegations of Peru and Ecuador as a result of the friendly negotiations which are being initiated today.
The protocol of June 21, 1924, provides for a further protocol to embody the terms of the common agreement reached through these discussions. After the ratification of this agreement by the Congresses of your two countries, if there is a territorial zone upon which agreement has not been possible, that zone is to be submitted to the arbitral determination of the President of the United States. If that duty falls to me, I pledge to you my best endeavors to conclude successfully the work of peace which you are about to begin.
The maintenance of peace in this Western Hemisphere must be the first concern of all of our peoples and of their Governments. I am confident that your deliberations here will furnish further encouragement and support for the practical application of the principle of the pacific settlement of disputes among Nations.
So you are doubly welcome to the United States and to this capital. You are very welcome because of your high purposes and you are equally welcome as distinguished representatives of our two sister Republics. I wish you Godspeed in your mission of peace.