Lyndon B. Johnson
April 23, 1968

Message to the Congress Transmitting Fifth Annual Report on Special International Exhibitions.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to transmit the Fifth Annual Report on Special International Exhibitions conducted during Fiscal Year 1967 under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961.
These exhibitions help tell the story of America.
They enable America's economic, social and cultural achievements to be exhibited at leading international fairs and in other priority locations. They help build bridges of understanding between the United States and other countries.
Each exhibition shows how American accomplishments relate to the interests and capabilities of the host countries. Because these National Pavilions feature equipment and products of American industries, they also contribute to mutually profitable trade relationships.
Nearly 110 million people--primarily in Eastern Europe and the developing countries-have visited more than 190 of these exhibitions since this program began in 1954.
The following exhibitions were presented during the fiscal year 1967 period:
Trade Fair Exhibitions in Bulgaria, France, Ghana, Hungary, Poland, Thailand, the USSR, Yugoslavia and West Berlin covered a wide range of subjects in the fields of agriculture, industry, science, education, and space exploration.
"Expo 67", in Montreal, highlighted the United States Pavilion with its theme "Creative America." Daily attendance from opening day on April 28, 1967, until June 30, 1967 averaged 55,000 visitors.
Special "East-West" Exhibitions on "Hand Tools-USA" and "Industrial Design-USA" were shown in Moscow and five other cities of the USSR to an audience of more than one and a half million people.
Labor Missions and Exhibits, presented by the Department of Labor at trade fairs in Hungary, Poland, Thailand and Yugoslavia portrayed aspects of the American labor scene to priority audiences.
Trade Missions were organized by the Department of Commerce in twelve countries of Africa, Europe, Latin America and the Middle East.
As in previous years, hundreds of private American firms contributed machines, products, company executives and technicians to assist in carrying out this program.
All Americans are indebted to them for their help in conveying a better understanding of America to peoples of other nations.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

April 23, 1968
Note: The report is entitled "Special International Exhibitions, Fifth Annual Report, July 1, 1966-June 30, 1967: Report of the United States Information Agency" (37 pp.).