Lyndon B. Johnson
April 20, 1965

Remarks of Welcome at the White House to the Prime Minister of Italy
Mr. Prime Minister and distinguished visitors:
This is an occasion that gladdens the hearts of all Americans. Our country is proud and grateful for friendships we enjoy with peoples and governments around the world.
Over the years no people have honored us more highly than have the people of Italy who have come to live as our neighbors and as valuable contributors to the success of our society.
Mr. Prime Minister, your coming today gives us an opportunity that we especially welcome, the opportunity to honor and salute you for all your many contributions to the strength and success of your great country. While this is your first visit to the United States we feel that we know you well. We know how valuable has been your courage and imagination and the efforts to restore freedom to the Italian people and to lead them to their greatest prosperity of this century. We have looked forward to meeting you, to talking with you, and to receiving your wise counsel on the course our Nation and all free nations may pursue together on the challenges that face us ahead.
In our world today there are no problems which may fairly be described as exclusively Italian, American, or European. There are only world problems, only human problems which beset all of mankind without regard to national boundaries. Our two nations joined so closely by bonds of blood and culture are privileged nations. By devotion to progressive purposes we have brought better lives to our people, greater strength to the cause of freedom, and greater justice for all peoples.
Now we are challenged together to devote our finest efforts to the highest of goals: true and lasting peace for men everywhere.
For the United States, Mr. Prime Minister, let me say as an early American President, Thomas Jefferson, said more than 160 years ago, peace is our passion. Our purpose is to assure peace with honor and freedom and justice for men everywhere.
I know that is the purpose of your efforts too. But the works of peace begin at home. Devotion to democracy must be a daily practice. We admire your own devotion to this standard. We apply this standard here in our own land in order that we do battle against poverty, against ignorance, against disease, against injustice.
You have given much to the cause of democracy, Mr. Prime Minister. You know as we know that democracy may sometimes be difficult and that it is always demanding, but you believe as we believe that when it is given the opportunity to work against the demands of extremists who seek its destruction, democracy succeeds and stands where other systems perish and fall.
In this spirit our two countries were never more closely allied than today. We both believe in peace. We both believe that war is not inevitable. We both are ready to make peace honorably as we both stand ever ready to defend freedom fully.
Our country and our city is honored today by your presence and by the presence of your distinguished Foreign Minister, Mr. Fanfani. We welcome you and we look forward to meetings which we believe will add new strength to the growing strength of freedom in the world.
Note: The President spoke at 11:15 a.m. on the South Lawn at the White House where Prime Minister Aldo Moro was given a formal welcome with full military honors. In his closing remarks he referred to Amintore Fanfani, Italy's Minister of Foreign Affairs.