Lyndon B. Johnson
April 24, 1965

Remarks at the Azalea Festival in Norfolk, Virginia.
Ladies an d gentlemen:
Someone once said that a daughter is a ticklish possession. I am reminded of this on occasions when I have the experience of reading the newspapers about Luci. I never really know when she is going to do what her father does instead of doing what her mother wishes that we would both do.
Luci has been having such a fine time down here at the Azalea Festival that I just couldn't resist the temptation to come down this afternoon and participate. Luci agreed and gave me clearance to come, I think, mainly because she said she needed some more ballpoint pens.
I am very proud to be here, as any father would be. While any father with a daughter is lucky, I am convinced that no father could be luckier than I am with both Lynda and Luci.
I am proud to be here in Norfolk in the great State of Virginia as President of the United States.
I am so happy that I could be here in the presence of your distinguished Governor Harrison, your distinguished Senator Willis Robertson, and your distinguished Congressman Porter Hardy, all of whom serve with great distinction in Washington.
Your city and this historic region of Virginia have been a source of great strength as long as we have been a nation. Today you are making a vital contribution to the strength of the great North Atlantic Alliance for freedom. All Americans value, respect, and look forward to growing strength for NATO.
So, I am very privileged now to thank you for permitting me to come here and crown the lovely queen of the Azalea Festival of 1965. And it gives me great pleasure to look at the lovely representatives of all of our NATO allies who happen to be here with us this afternoon, and their escorts.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 3:27 p.m. in the Azalea Gardens at Norfolk, Va., where he crowned his daughter Luci as Queen of the 12th International Azalea Festival. During his remarks he referred to Governor Albertis S. Harrison, Jr., Senator A. Willis Robertson, and Representative Porter Hardy, Jr., all of Virginia.