Lyndon B. Johnson
April 10, 1968

Remarks of Welcome at the White House to Chancellor Josef Klaus of Austria.
Mr. Chancellor and Mrs. Klaus, Under Secretary Katzenbach, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:
We welcome you to the beautiful Washington spring, Mr. Chancellor, at a time of turbulence and hope in our Nation.
As it is for us here in America, so it is around the world.
There is turbulence today in America-and in Eastern Europe--and in Southeast Asia--and there is hope, as well, in all of those places.
So our aim at this season is to sift the hope from the turbulence, so that hope may grow unfettered. As we go about that business, our hopes ride upon compassion, upon our sense of national purpose, and upon our feeling of responsibility in the time of challenge, and upon what an earlier era called "self-discipline." These times demand too:

--self-discipline between the races;

--self-discipline to persevere in the healing tasks of our Nation;

--self-discipline in the long and hard work of finding and seeking and bringing about a just and lasting peace.

In any society, men of good will and moderation are in the majority. The cynics-and there are always some of them--are in the minority. Those in the majority are the proportions that God set out when He made us all. It is the task and the test of democracy to assure that the moderate and good-willed majority prevails and has its way.
Mr. Chancellor, the experience of your nation tells us that it can. Austria was formed upon that democratic impulse for peace and for stability. A new society was forged from a four-power occupation force, in what was then the most turbulent area of the entire world.
You give us additional cause to believe that hope can coexist with turbulence and that freedom and order will, in time, prevail. We expect, this spring day in Washington, that this will happen in our country, in America, and that it will happen in Southeast Asia, and it will happen wherever men of good will earnestly seek and pursue peace and equity and justice for all. Mr. Chancellor, we are so glad that you could come here and honor us by your visit. We welcome you as a friend, sir, and we look forward with pleasurable anticipation to our exchanges together.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 11:43 a.m. on the South Lawn at the White House where Chancellor Klaus was given a formal welcome with full military honors. In his opening words the President also referred to Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, Under Secretary of State. Chancellor Klaus responded as follows:
Mr. President:
May I thank you also on behalf of Mrs. Klaus, most sincerely for having invited me officially to meet you and to visit your great country.
I highly appreciate the fact that I can meet you in spite of the difficult time when you are confronted with grave problems and difficult decisions which are of a particular bearing, not only for the future of the United States, but of the whole world.
I am glad to be here and to have the opportunity to renew the ties of friendship which so happily exist between our two countries.
The Austrian people will never forget the help of the United States which was decisive for the overcoming of the postwar difficulties. It has been especially since then that my country is particularly attached to your generous people.
I am looking forward with great pleasure to my talks with you, Mr. President, and with the distinguished members of your Government and the United States Congress.
I am pleased that my schedule provides for an extensive tour across your country.
Again, may sincerest thanks for having invited Mrs. Klaus and me to the United States.