Lyndon B. Johnson
April 20, 1965

Statement by the President Following a Meeting With Eugene Black To Discuss Economic Progress in Southeast Asia
I HAVE had a good talk with Mr. Eugene Black on our efforts to assist in the economic progress of southeast Asia. He has given me an encouraging report on the discussions which he had in New York with the Secretary General and other leaders of the U.N.
Mr. Black tells me that those discussions strongly support our view that this is centrally a matter for Asian leadership. Our hope is to act in cooperative support of the efforts of the Asian peoples themselves. Mr. Black tells me that this position is understood in the U.N.
Mr. Black has reported that he is deeply impressed by the quality of the work which has been carried forward under the Lower Mekong Basin Coordinating Committee. He has expressed to the Secretary General our strong support for the work of this Committee, and for the pattern of cooperation among the Mekong States which it represents.
Mr. Black has discussed with me the project for an Asian Development Bank. He reports that after discussions both in New York and Washington, he finds agreement within this Government that under appropriate conditions and with sound management such a bank would be of considerable value in promoting regional development in Asia. I agree with this position and believe that the United States would wish to participate if such a bank can be established.
In addition to regional plans and programs, Mr. Black and I have discussed more immediate actions to increase the direct flow of food and medicine and other supplies from this country to the people of southeast Asia. At my direction, plans for this purpose are being developed urgently in appropriate agencies of the Government.
Note: On April 7 in his address at Johns Hopkins University the President announced that Mr. Black, former President of the World Bank, would head a special team to inaugurate U.S. participation in certain development programs in southeast Asia (see Item 172). Later at his news conference on April 8 he stated that he was asking Mr. Black to meet with United Nations Secretary General U Thant for discussion of the southeast Asian economic situation (see Item 176 [1]).