Lyndon B. Johnson
April 08, 1967

Statement by the President Upon Signing Order Establishing the Commission on Postal Organization.
I HAVE today called upon 10 distinguished Americans to conduct the most searching and exhaustive review ever undertaken of the structure and organization of the Post Office Department.
Our postal service handles more mail than the rest of the world's postal systems combined. It is a primary lifeline of communication, affecting the daily lives of all citizens and the operations of every business.
Americans want and deserve the most efficient and modern postal system. Yet today we are in danger of falling behind in our effort to provide the very best service.
It is now time to determine whether the postal system as presently organized is capable of meeting the demands of our growing economy and our expanding population.
The Commission I have established today is eminently qualified to deal with this problem.
I have specifically asked the Commission to determine whether the high quality postal service which Americans have come to expect can better be performed by a Cabinet department, a Government corporation, or some other form of organization.
I have asked the Commission to consult with Government officials, private interests who are significant users of the postal service, Members of Congress, and postal employee organizations.
I have asked Chairman Kappel to submit the Commission's recommendations to me within a year.
I urge all Americans to cooperate with the Commission in its important work.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House announcement of the signing of Executive Order 11341 establishing the President's Commission on Postal Organization.
The announcement stated that the Commission would be chaired by Frederick R. Kappel, former. chairman of the board of the American Telephone and Telegraph Co. The other members were listed as follows: George Baker, dean, Harvard Business School; David Bell, vice president, Ford Foundation; Fred Borch, president, General Electric Corp.; David Ginsburg, Washington attorney; Ralph Lazarus, president, Federated Department Stores; George Meany, president, AFL-CIO; J. Irwin Miller, chairman of the board, Cummins Engine Co.; W. Beverly Murphy, president, Campbell Soup Co.; and Rudolph A. Peterson, president, Bank of America.