Lyndon B. Johnson
April 02, 1968

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report on Communications Satellite Activities.
To the Congress of the United States:
The Communications Satellite Act of 1962 requires that the President transmit to the Congress an annual report on the activities and accomplishments of the past year.

This is the fifth annual report under this landmark legislation. It reflects, as did the others, steady progress toward the ultimate goal of providing mankind with new capabilities for worldwide communication.
In the brief span of five years, satellite technology has grown dynamically. The possibilities envisioned in 1962 have been greatly exceeded.
Indeed, the rapid tempo of progress in telecommunications has created challenging problems in the proper use and orderly expansion of this vital national resource. Last August 14, in a report to the Congress on our communications policies, I announced the creation of a task force to examine the course we should follow in the future.
We know that we must provide the environment in which telecommunication can play its increasingly crucial role in the affairs of our nation, and provide bridges of understanding among all nations.
The role of communications is not limited to commercial use. It must also provide a "network for knowledge" so that all peoples can share the scientific, educational, and cultural advances of this planet.
Failure to reach these goals can only contribute to apathy, ignorance, poverty and despair in a very large part of the world. Success in our telecommunications policies can be a critical link in our search for the under. standing and tolerance from which peace springs.
Communication by satellite is a tool--one of the most promising which mankind has had thus far--to attain this end.

We must use it wisely and well.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

April 2, 1968
Note: The 11-page report is entitled "Annual Report on Activities and Accomplishments Under the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, January 1-December 31, 1967."
The Communications Satellite Corporation made public its "Report to the President and the Congress for the Calendar Year 1967" (47 pages) to coincide with the release of the President's report.
For the President's special message to Congress of August 14, 1967, on communications policy, see 1967 volume, this series, Book II, Item 346.