Lyndon B. Johnson
April 12, 1967

Executive Order 11343—Creating an Emergency Board to Investigate the Disputes Between the Long Island Rail Road and Certain of its Employees
WHEREAS, three disputes exist between The Long Island Rail Road, a carrier, and certain of its employees represented by the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, and International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, labor organizations; and
WHEREAS these disputes have not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended; and
WHEREAS these disputes, in the judgment of the National Mediation Board, threaten substantially to interrupt interstate commerce to a degree such as to deprive a section of the country of essential transportation service:
Now, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 10 of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 160), I hereby create a board of three members, to be appointed by me, to investigate these disputes. No member of the board shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier.
The board shall report its findings to the President with respect to these disputes within thirty days from the date of this order.
As provided by section 10 of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, from this date and for thirty days after the board has made its report to the President, no change, except by agreement, shall be made by The Long Island Rail Road, or by its employees, in the conditions out of which these disputes arose.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House
April 12, 1967
NOTE: The President signed the Executive order in Uruguay. It was not filed with the Office of the Federal Register before the cutoff time of this issue and as printed above follows the text of the White House press release. The White House also released biographic material for the three members appointed to the emergency board: Roland Boyd N. Thompson Powers, and George Edward Reedy, Jr.