Lyndon B. Johnson
April 23, 1968

Remarks Introducing Ambassador Edward Clark Following the OAS Charter Ceremony.
I WANT to take advantage of this occasion to introduce all of you to a distinguished American who is with us this morning who will be playing, in the days ahead, a key role in our relations with Latin America.
The man whom I have reference to has just completed a tour of duty as our Ambassador to Australia. As Ambassador to Australia, I believe that he learned and understood and knew more about the geography of that country, the resources of that country, and the people of that country and had more interest in them than, generally speaking, most ambassadors are able to display or to accumulate in that brief period.
He did such an outstanding job that when I gave thought to the selection of someone as United States Executive Director on the Inter-American Development Bank, someone whom I wanted to know the geography of Latin America, someone whom I wanted to know the resources of Latin America, someone whom I wanted to know the people of Latin America and to bring all three of these together in the way that the Inter-American Development Bank could play its major role and the United States of America could give its major contribution, I asked Ambassador Clark to take this assignment.
The Bank, as you know, is the financial cornerstone of our Alliance for Progress. In the first 7 years of its operation, it has authorized more than 450 loans totaling close to $2.5 billion. These loans have gone for water systems, schools, health stations, and huge dams and highways, satellite communications, and many other activities.
That is why the Bank has earned the title of the Bank of the Alliance in integration.
While Ambassador Clark will be only one of many individuals who make up the personnel of that great institution, I feel sure that he will be an interested one and a very active one.
Last Friday the Senate confirmed Ambassador Clark's appointment to this Bank. It gives me a great deal of pleasure this morning to wish him well in this new assignment and to say to our friends in Latin America that I don't know of an individual in this country who, in my judgment, could or would or can or will display more interest in your problems or do more about helping you solve them.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 11:52 a.m. in the East Room at the White House.