Lyndon B. Johnson
April 23, 1964

Proclamation 3584—National Maritime Day, 1964

Whereasour country, in facing the challenges and opportunities of rapidly changing and expanding world trade, looks upon the sea lanes as highways of international good will and opportunity; and
Whereasthe Nation looks to the maritime industry, working in cooperation with the Maritime Administration of the Department of Commerce and other Government agencies, to provide maritime programs and guidance that will best serve all Americans; and
Whereasthe American merchant fleet is an essential element of our economy which provides employment for seamen, shipbuilders, shoreside workers, and those in supporting industries, and which, by transporting our products to world markets abroad, significantly advances our efforts to achieve an equitable international balance of trade and payments; and
Whereasthe ships and men of the United States Merchant Marine stand ready to carry our flag abroad in peaceful competition today, or to deploy our seapower to the shores of any adversary in time of conflict; and
Whereasa strong merchant marine is essential to the economy and security of the free world, and merits the respect and support of our business community and the citizens of our Nation; and
Whereasthe Congress, by a joint resolution approved May 20, 1933 (48 Stat. 73), designated May 22 as National Maritime Day, in commemoration of the departure from Savannah, Georgia, on May 22, 1819, of the S.S. Savannah on the first transoceanic voyage by any steamship, and requested the President to issue a proclamation annually calling for the observance of that day:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby urge the citizens of the United States to honor our American Merchant Marine on Friday, May 22, 1964, by displaying the flag of the United States at their homes and other suitable places.
I direct the appropriate officials of the Government to arrange for the display of the flag on all Government buildings on National Maritime Day, and I request that all ships sailing, under the American flag dress ship on that day in tribute to the American Merchant Marine.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this 23rd day of April in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-four, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-eighth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
Dean Rusk,

Secretary of State.