Lyndon B. Johnson
April 14, 1964

Proclamation 3581—Loyalty Day, 1964

The strength and vigor of our Nation is directly attributable to the dedication, devotion, and loyalty of its people to the democratic principles embodied in our Constitution. We have had the good fortune from the time of the inception of our system of freedom and justice under law to be blessed with sons and daughters who have willingly and courageously risked, or sacrificed, their lives and their fortunes in order that this Nation might live and prosper. But the wisdom and sacrifices of yesterday cannot assure the perpetuation of our democratic institutions-they can be preserved only by the constant vigilance of a devoted and dedicated citizenry. It is for this reason that the Congress, by a joint resolution of July 18, 1958 (72 Stat. 369), designated May 1 of each year as Loyalty Day and called upon the President to issue a proclamation inviting the people of the United States to observe that day with appropriate ceremonies.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America do hereby call upon the people of the United States, and upon all patriotic, civic, and educational organizations to observe Friday, May 1, 1964, as Loyalty Day, in schools and other suitable places with appropriate ceremonies in which all of our people may join in a reaffirmation of their loyalty to the United States of America.
I also call upon appropriate officials of the Government to display the flag of the United States on all Government buildings on that day as a manifestation of our loyalty to the Nation which that flag symbolizes.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this fourteenth day of April in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-four, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-eighth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
George W. Ball,

Acting Secretary of State.