Lyndon B. Johnson
April 05, 1968

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Tubman of Liberia.
PRESIDENT William V. S. Tubman has concluded an official visit to the United States at the invitation of President Johnson. He was accompanied by Mrs. Tubman, several members of his cabinet and other government officials. While in Washington, President Tubman met with President Johnson and with Secretary Rusk for conversations on matters of mutual interest and concern.
During their meetings, the two Presidents reaffirmed the importance they place on the close and historic ties between the governments and peoples of Liberia and the United States. President Johnson expressed his appreciation for the spirit of cooperation which is the bedrock of these relations and assured President Tubman of the importance which he places on a strong relationship with Liberia.
In expressing Liberia's appreciation of the contribution which A.I.D. and the Peace Corps are making to Liberia's development, President Tubman outlined to President Johnson the economic problems and opportunities which lie ahead. He emphasized in particular the determination of the Liberian Government to become self-sufficient in food production and thus to make a contribution to world food needs. This will require assistance in production techniques and an extension of Liberia's road system to facilitate marketing and distribution. President Tubman stressed the importance which his Government attaches to the development of the Southeast region of the country through the establishment of transport facilities with special reference to the construction of a modern port at Harper. He expressed the strong hope that the United States would consider participating in this development to a substantial degree.
President Tubman also expressed his deep concern over the instability of primary commodity prices on world markets and in this connection made specific reference to the serious fall in the prices of Liberia's major export commodities. President Tubman expressed the hope that the United States Government would take a sympathetic attitude toward proposals for the stabilization of primary commodity prices.
President Johnson affirmed the deep and abiding interest of the United States in the economic and social progress of Liberia. He appreciated in this connection the problem for Liberia presented by the fall in commodity prices. He pledged United States support for the Liberian Government's effort to advance the country's growth, and a thorough and sympathetic review of the projects being proposed. The United States, responding to Liberia's agricultural needs, will assist in increasing rice production and in extending the road system. The United States and possibly interested third parties will study thoroughly the proposal for the Southeast region and the port at Harper. The United States also will pursue a vigorous program of support for general education in Liberia and will help to staff and train Liberians in the new medical center at Monrovia.
President Tubman and President Johnson found a wide range of agreement on many international issues and reaffirmed their adherence to the worldwide applicability of the principles of national independence and self-determination. President Tubman, speaking of Africa, outlined the progress the continent was making in building strong and independent states. He emphasized the spirit of cooperation evolving through the Organization of African Unity and other emerging regional organizations. In this connection, he made particular reference to the importance he attaches to the forthcoming conference in Monrovia of West African Chiefs of State to discuss regional economic questions.
President Johnson congratulated President Tubman for his outstanding statesmanship in the institutional development of Africa and his leadership in convening the Monrovia conference. He expressed the deep and sympathetic interest of the United States in such African initiatives and asked President Tubman to convey to the African leaders at Monrovia his best wishes for the success of their conference.
Note: See also Items 157, 159.