Lyndon B. Johnson
April 01, 1967

Statement by the President Upon Signing Resolution Providing Additional Emergency Food for India
THE WAR on hunger is the work of the entire world. H.J. Res. 267--supporting emergency food assistance to India--is a new expression of America's commitment to that humane task.
In passing the resolution by an overwhelming vote, the Congress has once again responded compassionately to India's critical food needs. We will provide her people with up to three million additional tons of food grain. An additional $25 million worth of food is authorized for distribution by CARE and other voluntary agencies to families in drought-stricken areas.
The joint resolution demonstrates our faith in India's own drive to achieve self-sufficiency in food grains. We believe that her ambitious program of agricultural development will be rewarded with steadily increasing food grain production. What we and the other more fortunate nations do to help India through a crisis will enable her to push forward with an economic development plan which will, we hope, bring sufficient food within the reach of her 500 million people.
The resolution also underlines the fact that success depends on other nations' help. The United States is not able to supply all the assistance that India needs. This offer endorsed by the Congress of up to 3 million tons of food grain in this resolution is contingent on appropriate matching from other countries. Other nations have responded in the past. We hope and trust they can and will meet these new and compelling needs.
The World Bank is already playing an important role in mobilizing the worldwide effort to assist India. It has called a meeting of the nations belonging to the India consortium in early April to discuss this and other economic problems which India faces. We will carefully follow these deliberations and decisions.
I urge the nations attending that meeting to continue and to expand their food aid and general economic aid. I hope that nations which have not been associated with this effort in the past will join with us now, either formally or informally.
Hunger transcends national borders and ideologies. It is a condition that all understand and none can countenance. This resolution reaffirms America's intention to do its part to help India meet the threat of hunger that confronts her today.
Note: As enacted, H.J. Res. 267 is Public Law 90-7 (81 Stat. 7).