Lyndon B. Johnson
April 14, 1965

Remarks on Arrival at Toledo, Ohio.
I AM DELIGHTED to be here this afternoon with Governor Rhodes, Congressmen Ashley, Sweeney, Feighan, Vanik, Gilligan, Love, Bow, and Mosher.
I have visited today in three States. I have flown across and observed from the air six States. All of these States were struck by the tragedies of this past weekend.
I have come here this afternoon to Toledo to see firsthand, to look for myself at the extensive damages caused and to meet with your public officials to plan with them the support and the action that the Federal Government can take in assisting your city and your citizens to meet the challenge which has been inflicted so cruelly and so unexpectedly.
No words of ours would be adequate to express the sympathy and the compassion of the entire Nation for those who have suffered the loss of loved ones or injuries to members of their families. So I want each of you to know that we share with you the heavyheartedness that I know weighs upon you flow.
It is an American characteristic to be concerned not about self alone but about the fate and the fortune of your neighbors and your friends under circumstances such as these. It is also an American characteristic for those who have suffered hardship and tragedies to turn quickly and hopefully to the task of reconstruction.
Wherever we have gone throughout this long, long day I have seen that spirit, and I have seen it in Americans, and it is strong and it is sure.
I would like to express to you my personal concern, as evidenced by my presence here, and my condolences. I would also, as your President, like to pledge to you the full cooperation and support of your Government in working with your State and with your local officials to help overcome the losses that so many of you have suffered.
Governor Rhodes was in contact with us yesterday. We told him then that the full facilities and power of the Federal Government were at your disposal. We will be here today to take a firsthand look. We hope that by the time we get back to Washington tonight we can have plans in the offing to relieve as much misery as possible and to begin our task of rebuilding.
Unfortunately through the years we suffer from these disasters and we can't help that, but once we have them we can do something about it. That is what I have come here to do.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 3:13 p.m. at the express Airport at Toledo. In his opening words he referred to Governor James A. Rhodes and to Representatives Thomas L. Ashley, Robert E. Sweeney, Michael A. Feighan, Charles A. Vanik, John I. Gillipan, Rodney M. Love, Frank T. Bow, and Charles A. Mosher, all of Ohio.