Lyndon B. Johnson
August 11, 1966

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report on the International Educational and Cultural Exchange Program.
To the Congress of the United States:
Pursuant to the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961, I am transmitting the annual report on the International Educational and Cultural Exchange Program for Fiscal Year 1965. Transmitted with this report is the United States Grantee Directory for Fiscal Year 1965.
The educational and cultural programs of our Government are conducted in a world so interdependent that it constitutes, in a sense, a single environment. In this global community, education must be international in focus if the cause of understanding and peace among peoples is to be served. Education for world responsibility is no longer an option. It is rather a necessity.
In addition to fostering an informed and responsible attitude toward the world among students, the program surveyed in this report has encouraged the flow of ideas among the leaders and thinkers of different nations and cultures.
But full heads and empty hearts breed disunity rather than unity. Therefore, the international educational and cultural exchange program, by bringing people of diverse nationalities together in common endeavors--of learning, teaching, truth seeking-has cultivated the humane virtues of sympathy, sensitivity, and tolerance.
In an age when men feel particularly threatened by impersonal forces and alienated from their fellows, this program unobtrusively reminds us that the mind and heart of man know no physical barriers.
I commend this report to the thoughtful scrutiny of the Congress.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House

August 11, 1966
Note: The "Annual Report to the Congress on the International Educational and Cultural Exchange Program, Fiscal Year 1965" (136 pp.) and the "United States Grantee Directory, Fiscal Year 1965" (Government Printing Office, 239 pp.) were issued by the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, Department of State.
The President's message was not made public in the form of a White House press release. A copy of the text was posted on the bulletin board in the Press Secretary's office at the White House.