Lyndon B. Johnson
August 05, 1966

Statement by the President in Response to the Report of the United States-Puerto Rico Commission on the Status of Puerto Rico.
I HAVE received the report of the United States-Puerto Rico Commission on the Status of Puerto Rico. The Commission was established pursuant to joint legislation enacted in 1964 by the Congress and the Legislative Assembly of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
It is a comprehensive document, reflecting 2,000 pages of testimony and expert analysis bearing on the relationship between the United States and Puerto Rico. Many of its conclusions obtained virtually unanimous approval. This in itself is a tribute to the commonsense and dedication of the Commission members.
I am particularly impressed by the Commission's recommendation that ad hoc joint advisory groups be appointed from time to time, upon the joint initiative of the President of the United States and the Governor of Puerto Rico. These groups, composed of persons of the highest prestige and ability, would consider problems and proposals affecting relations between the island and the mainland. Among such proposals would be those offered for the improvement and growth of commonwealth, or for change to statehood or independence.
The report emphasizes that the relationship between the United States and Puerto Rico is, and should continue to be, based on principles of mutual consent and self-determination.

All three status alternatives--commonwealth, statehood, and independence--are within the power of the people of Puerto Rico and the Congress to establish, under the Constitution. The Commission makes clear that as a form of political status, each alternative confers equal dignity and equality.
The choice of the Puerto Rican people will inevitably involve economic, social, and cultural factors. They will want to assure that the growth, prosperity, and security of the island will be served by whatever governmental status they may choose. This is also the profound concern and desire of the mainland Government.
Working together, the United States and Puerto Rico can achieve a better life for the energetic people of the Commonwealth. Much progress has already been made, in large part through the enlightened leadership of the Puerto Rican Government itself. Much remains to be done--and it can and will be done. Our relationship is creative and flexible, permitting us to work out our mutual problems in an atmosphere of trust and forbearance.
I want to assure the people of Puerto Rico of my most enthusiastic cooperation in their efforts to chart a course for Puerto Rico that best accords with their wishes.
Note: The 3-volume report, entitled "Hearings Before the United States-Puerto Rico Commission on the Status of Puerto Rico" is printed in Senate Document 108 (89th Cong., 2d sess.).