Lyndon B. Johnson
August 17, 1964

Statement by the President Upon Issuing Memorandum on the Staffing of International Organizations.
I HAVE issued a memorandum which seeks to assure that the very highest caliber of Americans will be available for staffing the international organizations in which the United States plays a role.
Over the years, United States participation in such organizations has been constantly increasing. We have sponsored many of them and we contribute financially to all of them. At the present time we belong to more than 50 such groups.
It seems to me to be the part of wisdom to back our stake in such groups with the very highest caliber of people available. The capacity and effectiveness of these organizations depend upon the quality of those who administer them. And even though I have a great deal of respect for the efforts of those Americans already working in them, I do not feel we have done enough to help these agencies secure the services of highly qualified American men and women from private life and from Government agencies.
Final responsibility for selecting people rests quite properly with the appropriate agencies themselves. But it is our duty, not only to the international agencies but to our own country, to be certain that in recruiting their personnel, these agencies have ready access to talented and dedicated Americans who are qualified by every prudent test.
With that thought in mind, I have approved the attached memorandum.
MEMORANDUM TO THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVES DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
It is the policy of this government to do its full share to assist in the development of sound, efficient international organizations to keep the peace, to resolve disputes, to promote peaceful change, to conduct a world war against poverty, to exchange technology, and for other purposes.
At the present time we belong to more than half a hundred such organizations. We have sponsored many of them. We contribute financially to all of them.
But the capacity and efficiency of these organizations depend, in the end, upon the quality and the motivations of the international civil servants who administer them. These organizations--and our national interest in their fortunes--deserve the services of some of the ablest citizens of the United States. In past years we have not done enough to help these agencies secure the services of highly qualified men and women from private life and from government agencies.
Final responsibility for selection of personnel to staff international organizations rests, of course, with the appropriate officers of those organizations. But we must make sure that recruitment of their personnel is supported by ready access to talented citizens of this country who are qualified for positions in the international agencies.
It is my desire that:
(1) All Executive Departments and Agencies take affirmative and continuing steps to assist international organizations to obtain properly qualified United States candidates for employment.
(2) All Executive Departments and Agencies encourage their able employees to accept assignments with international organizations in accordance with the authority of Public Law 85-795, and give positive recognition to the government's interest in the training and career advancement advantages of such employment.
(3) All Executive Departments and Agencies continue employer contributions toward Federal retirement and insurance benefits for employees serving international organizations in accordance with the authority of Public Law 85-795, in the absence of arrangements for such contributions by the employing international organization.
(4) All Executive Departments and Agencies assist actively in finding qualified candidates in their fields of specialization when requested to do so by the Agencies having primary responsibility.
(5) The Secretary of State provide leadership and coordination of this effort and develop policies and procedures to advance it, including the seeking of assistance from the state and local governments and from non-governmental organizations in locating qualified candidates in private employment.
(6) The Secretary of State report annually on the effectiveness of the recruitment program in behalf of international organizations established herein.
This memorandum shall be published in the Federal Register.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
August 15, 1950