Lyndon B. Johnson
August 12, 1966

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Report "Insurance and Other Programs for Financial Assistance to Flood Victims.
To the Congress of the United States:
I have recently transmitted to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate a report by the Task Force on Federal Flood Control Policy, entitled "A Unified National Program for Managing Flood Losses." That report discussed several problems requiring further study, including the need for and feasibility of a program of flood insurance.
Today I am transmitting a report from the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, entitled "Insurance and Other Programs for Financial Assistance to Flood Victims." Undertaken in accordance with provisions of the Southeast Hurricane Disaster Relief Act of 1965, this report provides a significant contribution to greater understanding of this complex and difficult problem. The Secretary has prepared a thorough, well-documented report.
Additional study is required before final judgment can be reached on the design of a national flood insurance program. Accordingly, I am instructing all interested Federal departments and agencies to give this report intensive and careful review so that detailed proposals, including appropriate legislation, may be presented to the Congress.
I also urge that the report be reviewed both by the Congress and the many interested groups and individuals throughout the Nation. The need for financial protection against flood losses to private property is widely recognized. The report will provide an excellent opportunity to give this matter thorough and informed consideration.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House

August 12, 1966
Note: The 224-page report (processed), entitled "Insurance and Other Programs for Financial Assistance to Flood Victims," is dated August 8, 1966.
For the President's letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate, transmitting the task force report, see Item 374.