Lyndon B. Johnson
August 16, 1965

Statement by the President on the Need for Industry-Wide Procedures To Settle Manning Disputes on Automated Ships.
THE KEY ISSUE in the present controversy between the American Merchant Marine Institute and the Marine Engineers Beneficial Association involves procedures for handling manning disputes on automated ships.
This difficulty has arisen repeatedly in other situations in the shipping industry.
It is dear that an industry-wide procedure, or a uniform pattern of procedures, for the handling of manning and related issues in the maritime industry has become an absolute necessity.
Such a procedure cannot be developed in a single set of negotiations and a settlement of the present controversy should not be held up while the necessary broader procedures are established.
I have today asked the Secretary of Labor and Mr. George Meany, President of the AFL--CIO, to undertake the development, with the participation of all unions and associations in the maritime industry, and with such assistance as they find necessary, of effective procedures for resolving manning and related issues arising from the mechanization and retrofitting of ships.
A general charter for the establishment of such procedures is contained in the unanimous Automation Report of the President's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy:
1. Automation and technological progress are essential to the general welfare, the economic strength, and the defense of the Nation.
2. This progress can and must be achieved without the sacrifice of human values.
3. Achievement of technological progress without sacrifice of human values requires a combination of private and governmental action, consonant with the principles of a free society.
The contemplated procedures to be effective must provide the fullest practicable assurance that manning and related issues be settled without interruption of operations.
Such procedures must be made on the concurrence and participation of all private parties whose interests are affected, and must achieve a parity of procedures insofar as interrelated interests are affected.
I have asked Secretary Wirtz and Mr. Meany to report the results of their undertaking to me, with accompanying recommendations if this is appropriate, at the earliest possible time. I will then take or propose such action as appears appropriate in the light of their report.
I propose to see to it that this problem, which involves public and private interests alike, is met fully and effectively.
It will be essential to the working out of these procedures that while they are being developed there be no interruption of operations resulting from disputes over manning or related issues on automated ships, and that there be no action taken which will make the development of such procedures more difficult. If particular manning issues arise in the interim, Secretary Wirtz and Mr. Meany will be in a position to propose procedures for their handling which will not be inconsistent either with existing contract provisions or with the carrying out of their responsibility under this statement.
I request and will expect the full cooperation of all shipping associations and unions in the development of such procedures, recognizing existing contract provisions and also the desirability of establishing a parity of manning dispute procedures.
I urge that the manning dispute procedure issue between the AMMI and the MEBA be quickly resolved in reliance upon the establishment of procedures under the auspices indicated in this statement, and in general conformance with the recommendation made to them by the Secretary of Labor on July 30, 1965.
It is imperative that negotiations between the AMMI and the Masters, Mates and Pilots Association, and those between the Institute and the American Radio Association and other officer unions, also be quickly concluded.
I recommend that if it is necessary, any remaining issues in any of the three cases be submitted to settlement procedures to be prescribed by the Secretary of Labor.
I have asked Secretary Wirtz to report to me regarding this situation by 5 p.m., Wednesday, August 18.
It is the intent of this action and these proposals that they will result in the speedy resumption of operation of the ships which are now idle.
My broader intent is that there be established in this industry an effective and fair method of disputes settlement which is essential to the future of the American merchant marine.
Note: The report of the President's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy, entitled "Automation," is dated January 11, 1962 (Government Printing Office, I I pp.).
Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz and George Meany, President of the AFL-CIO, reported orally to the President on August 18, 1965. See also Item 463[3].
The statement was released at Austin, Tex.