Lyndon B. Johnson
August 04, 1967

Presidential Unit Citation Awarded the 2d Battalion (Airborne), 503d Infantry, 173d Airborne Brigade (Separate), USA, and Attached Units
BY VIRTUE of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States I have today awarded
THE PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION (ARMY) FOR EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM

TO

THE 2D BATTALION (AIRBORNE) 503D INFANTRY, 173D AIRBORNE BRIGADE ( SEPARATE )
AND ATTACHED UNITS
The 2d Battalion (Airborne), 503d Infantry, 173d Airborne Brigade (Separate), with attachments, is cited for extraordinary heroism in connection with military operations against a hostile force near Phouc Vinh, Republic of Vietnam, on March 10, 1966 The Battalion was participating as part of a larger force on a search and destroy mission sweeping a portion of war zone "D" during operation "Silver City", and had been in contact with small groups of Viet Cong during four days of operations in the dense jungle area. On the morning of 16 March the Battalion was deployed in a defensive perimeter in preparation for resuming operations.
At approximately 0700 hours a patrol from Company "B" had begun to move from its positions to initiate action against the enemy. At the same time, a resupply helicopter was descending onto the landing zone located within the Battalion perimeter. Suddenly the helicopter came under heavy automatic weapons fire from the enemy and was destroyed, and the jungle erupted in gunfire all around the defensive perimeter. The leading elements of the patrol were caught in this initial concentration of murderous fire. The Viet Cong forces, supported by a tremendous volume of automatic weapons, mortar and artillery fire, attacked all around the perimeter. The enemy exerted considerable force at a point between Company "A" and Company "C" in an effort to effect a breakthrough at this location.
Personnel of the two companies, including the wounded, steadfastly remained in their positions, responded at close quarters with fire that was both deadly and accurate, and succeeded in breaking up the determined enemy attack. Maintaining continuous contact around the perimeter, the Viet Cong launched another strong attack to breach the defenses. This effort was focused on the center and left flank of Company "B". Time and time again the Viet Cong charged the positions, but the indefatigable and determined paratroopers of Company "B" exacted heavy casualties and beat back the enemy attackers.
Regrouping and concentrating their forces, the Viet Cong made a final assault on the flank of Company "C". This time the desperate Viet Cong ran forward in waves under the protective umbrella of a heavy volume of their supporting fires. Again, however, the gallant and resolute paratroopers repulsed the enemy, inflicting severe losses, completely disrupting his efforts to destroy the Battalion, and forcing the Viet Cong to withdraw. Documentary evidence indicates that the attacking force consisted of the entire Viet Cong 271st Main Force Regiment, reinforced by two artillery battalions. A total of 303 Viet Cong dead were confirmed by body count. An estimated additional 150 were killed and numerous Viet Cong were wounded during the battle. The courageous and exemplary actions of the 2d Battalion (Airborne), 503d Infantry, in decisively defeating a determined, numerically superior, and well trained and equipped enemy force reflect great credit on the members of the Unit and are in keeping with the finest traditions of the United States Army.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON