Lyndon B. Johnson
August 14, 1966

Remarks to the Press at the LBJ Ranch Following a Report on Vietnam by General Westmoreland
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen:
We are delighted to have you here to visit with General and Mrs. Westmoreland before they return to their service area.
General Westmoreland and I agreed last February to meet as often as possible and necessary to discuss the developments in Vietnam.
As Commander in Chief, I have a very strong desire, as well as a need, to review directly with our field commander the military operations in that most crucial conflict.
Last May I had the opportunity to discuss with Ambassador Lodge personally, and in some detail, the Vietnam situation. I intend to continue these face-to-face meetings with Ambassador Lodge and General Westmoreland from time to time in the months ahead.
When I heard that General Westmoreland would be in Honolulu to review Vietnam operations with Admiral Sharp and the other officers of CINCPAC, I asked him to meet me here for a very full but informal report on Vietnam before returning there.
General Westmoreland and I talked last evening until the early hours of the morning today. We discussed the overall situation and went into considerable detail on more than three dozen specific subjects. General Westmoreland has agreed to answer your questions before he leaves this morning.
My talks with General Westmoreland have confirmed the conviction that: --the United States has never had a more efficient and courageous fighting force in the field than the men who are serving us at this hour in Vietnam;
--that these men are backed up by the most effective medical and materiel support in the history of our country;

--that our forces and those of our allies will not be defeated by the Communists in Vietnam;

--that a Communist military takeover in South Vietnam is no longer just improbable; as long as the United States and our brave allies are in the field, it is impossible;

--that the single most important factor now is our will to prosecute the war until the Communists, recognizing the futility of their ambitions, either end the fighting or seek a peaceful settlement.

--no one can say when this will be or how many men will be needed, or how long we must persevere. The American people must know that there will be no quick victory, but the world must know that we will not quit.
You do not have to talk personally with General Westmoreland for very long before you realize anew how inspired are the officers and the men under his command. No words of mine can say how much each of us in America owes these men.

They know why they are there.
They know that more than just the future of a small country is being determined now by their devotion. They know that on their sacrifice the peace of Southeast Asia--and indeed the security of much of the world-will be built.
General Westmoreland, I want you to take back with you my personal message to all of our men in Vietnam. That message is this: You are our best. You make every American proud.
And when you return, tell the men in the field that their determination and their courage in Vietnam will be matched by a dedicated resolve and support here at home.
We hope, as we begin this new week, that we can have a renewed determination and a united America supporting the forces of free men in Vietnam.
General Westmoreland, you will carry away with you not only our prayers and our hopes, but all the support that this Nation can give you.
General Westmoreland.
Note: The President spoke at 11:07 a.m. at the LBJ Ranch, Johnson City, Texas. During his remarks he referred to Gen. William C. Westmoreland, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, Henry Cabot Lodge, U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Vietnam, and Adm. U. S. Grant Sharp, Jr., Commander of U.S. Forces in the Pacific.
Following the President's remarks, General Westmoreland held a news conference, the text of which is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 2, p. 1066).