Lyndon B. Johnson
August 31, 1966

Proclamation 3741—Twentieth Anniversary of UNESCO

On November 4, 1946, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) officially came into being as one of the specialized agencies of the United Nations.
UNESCO was created for the purpose of contributing to peace and security "by promoting collaboration among the nations through education, science and culture in order to further universal respect for justice, for the rule of law and for the human rights and fundamental freedoms which are affirmed for the peoples of the world, without distinction of race, sex, language or religion, by the Charter of the United Nations."
Our Government was active in the founding of UNESCO. It has continued to support the Organization in its effort to create a climate in the world in which a just peace may prevail.
UNESCO has a critical role to play in bringing the educational techniques of the developed world to the newly emerging nations of man's family. Its mission should embrace the simplest teaching, and the most sophisticated arts and sciences of which our species is capable.
As we work to build in America a truly great society, it is with hope and satisfaction that we look upon the work of UNESCO in its effort to advance the common welfare of mankind:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby call to the attention of the people of the United States that November 4, 1966, is the Twentieth Anniversary of UNESCO and call upon them to observe the occasion with appropriate ceremonies and manifestations of support for the Organization.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this 31st day of August in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-six, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-first.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:

DEAN RUSK

Secretary of State