Lyndon B. Johnson
August 05, 1965

Statement by the President on the Proposed Korean Institute for Industrial Technology and Applied Science.
I AM very pleased and grateful for the enthusiastic and generous welcome given Dr. Hornig and his delegation by the people of Korea and by President Park. The interest there in the Institute for Industrial Technology and Applied Science project is most encouraging.
When President Park was here, we discussed the need and opportunity to bring the wealth of modern science and technology strongly to bear more effectively on the problems of Korea's growing industry. I believe the Institute idea which grew out of our conversations can set an example of excellence in Korea and in the world. It will provide opportunities at home for an able young generation of Korean engineers and scientists. Also, it will be a model for constructive cooperation with other developing countries.
We will work together with the Korean Government and Korean industry to build up the new Institute as rapidly as talented people can be assembled for the task. I have asked the Director of the Agency for International Development, in consultation with Dr. Hornig, to proceed as rapidly as possible with concrete steps to accomplish this goal.
I am grateful to Dr. Hornig, his wife, and the other members of the mission for the credit they have done their country by this outstandingly successful visit to Korea. I believe the language of science offers us new and still largely unstaffed opportunities for international understanding and cooperation. I am hopeful that we may develop an increasing number of joint programs in which the talents of our science and those of other countries can be united in constructive endeavors.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House release announcing his meeting with Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, and the group which had accompanied him to Korea (see Item 344).
The release stated that Dr. Hornig told the President that the proposed institute had aroused widespread interest in Korea and had been warmly supported by leaders in government, education, and industry.
See also Item 257.