Lyndon B. Johnson
August 03, 1965

Message to the Congress Transmitting First Annual Report of the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission.
To the Congress of the United States:
By Public Law 88-609, I was authorized to appoint five men from private life to make a full study of the most suitable site for, and best means of constructing, a sea level canal connecting the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. On April 18, 1965, I appointed five distinguished American citizens to serve on the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Commission. They are: Robert B. Anderson, Chairman, Robert G. Storey, Vice-Chairman, Milton S. Eisenhower, Kenneth E. Fields and Raymond A. Hill.
The Commission immediately set about its difficult and complicated mission. The initial phase of its work has been to develop a program of investigations covering the many aspects of the construction of a sea level canal. It has selected the Chief of Engineers, United States Army, to conduct the Engineering Feasibility Study under the direction of the Commission. The Commission will soon call upon other Government and private agencies to carry out additional studies to aid in assessing the broad national and international implications of a sea-level canal. By early next year the Commission expects to begin on-site surveys of possible canal routes. The Commission is also contemplating a trip to Panama in the near future to study at firsthand the present Canal Zone and another possible canal route in Panama's Darien Province. I am highly gratified by the progress made by the Commission, under the able leadership of Mr. Anderson, during the short period that it has been working.
The Commission has requested the Congress to appropriate sufficient funds in Fiscal Year 1966 to initiate investigations on the most promising sea-level canal routes. On-site surveys would begin in January, with the next annual dry season on the Isthmus. I recommend prompt action on the request in order that the Commission be in a position to initiate this important aspect of its work during this four-month period of favorable weather conditions.
Under the terms of the authorizing legislation, the Commission is required to report to me on its progress for transmittal to the Congress on July 31 of each year and to make its final report not later than June 30, 1968. I take pleasure in submitting the first annual report of the Commission.
In forwarding this report to the Congress, I wish to reiterate the importance which I attach to pressing forward with plans and preparations for a sea-level canal. I think this is needed for the protection and promotion of peaceful trade, as well as for the welfare of the Hemisphere. It is needed in the true interests of the United States and in fairness and justice to all.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House

July 31, 1965
Note: The report of the Commission (dated July 31, 1965, 9 pp., processed) is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 1, p. 38).
The bill providing for the Atlantic-Pacific interoceanic canal study was approved by the President on September 22, 1964 (Public Law 88-609; 78 Stat. 990).