Lyndon B. Johnson
August 16, 1967

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Chancellor Kiesinger of Germany.
PRESIDENT JOHNSON and Chancellor Kiesinger issued the following joint statement at the conclusion of the visit which Chancellor Kiesinger and Vice Chancellor Willy Brandt made in Washington on August 15-16:
We continued the exchange of views which we began in Bonn on the occasion of the funeral of Konrad Adenauer in April of this year. We are convinced that these regular, frank and far-reaching discussions of the international situation as well as of questions which are of particular concern to our two countries will solidify and strengthen the friendly relationship and trust that exists between us and between our two nations.
Our most important common goal is the maintenance of peace. The North Atlantic Alliance serves this goal. We agree fully that it must continue and indeed it must be strengthened.
We share the view that a policy of relaxation of tensions can help avoid conflicts. Such a policy can remove the causes of existing tensions, can overcome differences and in this way lead to mutual understanding and trust among peoples. It is only by following such a policy that the division of Europe and the division of Germany can be ended and a just and permanent 'peace be established in Europe.
We are fully convinced that the unification of Western Europe will mark a significant contribution to world peace and to the welfare of all peoples. This requires continued cooperation and lasting friendship among the nations of Europe. Such a united Europe will be a friend and partner to the United States.
We agree fully that Europe and the United States are dependent upon one another for their security. The planning of the common defense in the years to come must remain in the hands of NATO. We are in complete agreement that a one-sided weakening in the ability of the West to assure its security will not promote the relaxation of tensions, which is desired by both of us. Both countries must sustain their defense efforts.
We are fully in accord that both countries also bear a responsibility to help other peoples in the world to attain economic growth and prosperity.
We agreed on the great importance of reaching international agreement at the September meeting of the International Monetary Fund in Rio de Janeiro on a meaningful plan to assure adequate additions to international liquidity, as and when needed, by a supplement to existing reserve assets.
We also had a full exchange of views on the general international situation, including the Middle East, Southeast Asia and recent developments in the field of disarmament.
We concluded that personal meetings and consultations between us make a significant contribution to the friendship and mutual understanding of our two countries. We agreed that we would stay in close touch with each other.