Lyndon B. Johnson
August 09, 1968

Letter to Secretary Weaver on the Need for International Exchange of Housing Information and Technology.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
Several months ago, I asked the Director of the Office of Science and Technology to focus on this question: Is the United States making effective use of the experience of other modern nations in the design, construction and procurement of housing?
The study has concluded that we can-and should--do much better in sharing our knowledge and in drawing upon the experience of other nations in the field of housing construction and technology.
A pooling of knowledge and the exchange of ideas can have these important benefits for our nation. It can:

--Result in more efficient and less expensive construction of housing.

--Develop and identify additional export markets for building materials and components.

--Hasten the advancement in technology of the U.S.. building industry.

--Improve the flow of basic and innovative information to universities that are training the next generation of city planners, engineers, and designers.
Accordingly, I believe we must increase our participation in international organizations such as the Housing, Building, and Planning Committee of the Economic Commission For Europe.
I also believe that we should take every opportunity to encourage the exchange of housing research and development reports with other nations and to provide a flow of technical information to housing agencies at all levels of government, to the construction industry, to universities, and to engineers and architects.
I am therefore directing you to take every necessary step to promote the exchange of information and housing technology with other nations. I have asked the Secretary of State to assist you in every possible way.
This program will benefit the international community. It can be of prime importance in reaching our ten-year housing goal here in America--a decent home for every family.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

[Honorable Robert Weaver, Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, D.C.]
Note: The letter was released at Austin, Texas.