Lyndon B. Johnson
December 11, 1968

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the Amir of Kuwait.
HIS HIGHNESS, Shaikh Sabah al-Salim al Sabah, Amir of Kuwait, is paying a state visit to the United States during the month of December 1968, at the invitation of President Lyndon B. Johnson. The two heads of state met at noon on December 11 to discuss the relations between their two governments and to review matters of common importance internationally.
His Highness the Amir and the President spoke of the strong relations which exist between Kuwait and the United States and which date back over fifty years before Kuwait acquired full independence in 1961. They agreed that--in addition to economic relations--the two countries have mutual interests in preserving regional and international peace, stability, and the strengthening of the economies of developing nations. The President assured His Highness the Amir of his personal belief that the United States' keen interest in these mutual concerns would continue and that the United States would endeavor to maintain and strengthen the close ties which now exist between the two countries.
The two leaders reviewed the relations between the two countries and expressed their satisfaction at the development of these relations in the cultural, industrial, commercial and technical fields.
The President and His Highness the Amir discussed international affairs. The president described U.S.. efforts to bring a just peace to Southeast Asia. His Highness the Amir expressed his hope that peace and stability would prevail in that area.
The two leaders reviewed thoroughly the situation in the Middle East. His Highness explained Kuwait's attitude toward the Palestine Question and emphasized the rights of the Palestinian people to return to their homeland, and his total rejection of annexation by force of Arab territories in contradiction of the charter of the United Nations. The President explained that U.S.. efforts in the area are directed at the achievement of a lasting and honorable peace based on the United Nations Security Council Resolution of November 22, 1967. The President noted that the U.S.. Government fully supports the efforts of Ambassador Jarring to this end.
The President and His Highness the Amir discussed the situation which will result from the withdrawal of Britain from the Gulf Amirates. They expressed their desire that stability prevail in the area as a basis for its progress and prosperity through the cooperation of the states bordering on the Gulf.
Note: The joint statement referred to Gunnar Jarring, Swedish Ambassador to the Soviet Union and United Nations mediator in the Middle East dispute.