Lyndon B. Johnson
December 13, 1967

Remarks by the President at a Press Briefing by Col. Daniel James, Jr., USAF, Following His Report on Vietnam.
COLONEL JAMES had in excess of 100 missions in Korea. He is a fighter pilot who has had almost the equivalent of that in Southeast Asia. He has had some 78 or 79 missions over North Vietnam.
I talked to him about a good many things, specifically the air campaign there; what they are doing; the morale of our troops, particularly of our pilots; our equipment; the quality of the opposition and the problems he faces; the progress that the services have made; advancing people on their merit without regard to color; the work that he has done with the people of Thailand and how they got along with them.
Colonel James' name is Colonel Daniel James, Jr., and his nickname is "Chappy." He has reported into Washington before he picks up his family in Arizona. He met with Senator Hayden briefly earlier.
He has been vice commander of the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing in Thailand. You will remember his commander was in a short time ago, Colonel Robin Olds--his wing commander.
In many of these combat missions, Colonel James, because of his experience and his ability, was the strike leader.
He has three children. His son is going to be a fighter pilot. He is at the University of Arizona now and is planning to go to another school. His daughter was a stewardess for TWA.
I think I have covered generally what we talked about. I will leave and take another appointment which I have. If you have any questions of Colonel James, I guess if he can take care of the North Vietnamese he can take care of you. I don't know.
This is Colonel James U. Cross, my Armed Forces Aide and this is Major Robinson. But he tells me he is Lieutenant Colonel as of this morning. He is Army Assistant to the Armed Forces Aide to the President.
Note: The President introduced Colonel James at 12:55 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The full text of the news briefing is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 3, P. 1705).
As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.