Lyndon B. Johnson
December 15, 1966

Remarks at a Reception for a Group of Veterans of the War in Vietnam.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Mrs. Johnson told me of her very great pleasure at your willingness to come here this afternoon and visit this house upon this occasion.
I have just been meeting with some gentlemen in connection with some problems that you have already done a great deal about. I asked them to come here with me in the thought that perhaps they would want to see the men who had been so gallant and so courageous and so dedicated to freedom. I knew you would like to see some of them who act and talk and work every day to do likewise.
First I want you to know that Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary McNamara, and Secretary of the Treasury Fowler are now in the NATO councils trying to pursue solutions that will lead us to peace in the world and to freedom for men everywhere.
In their absence we have Acting Secretary of State, Mr. Nicholas Katzenbach, who is Under Secretary of State. I wanted you to meet him.

Mr. Katzenbach.
MR. KATZENBACH. The only word I would say is to echo what the President has said: That everybody in this administration, the president and all of us who are working for peace in this world of ours, are very, very grateful for all that you have done and all that you have given.
THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Secretary of Defense, Mr. Cyrus Vance.
MR. VANCE Mr. President, all I want to say is that I am very proud to be associated in the Defense Department with all of these magnificent men.
THE PRESIDENT. The distinguished Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral McDonald.
ADMIRAL MCDONALD. Thank you, Mr. President. Having spent over 40 years of my life in the military, I think I have a full appreciation of what you fellows have contributed.
THE PRESIDENT. Gentlemen, no guests ave ever been more welcome in this house.
Each of you has exercised the highest form of citizenship that any citizen can perform. You have all defended freedom in a great hour of need. You bear the scars of that sacrifice as an emblem of devotion to your country.
Your President salutes you, and your Nation salutes you.
In a short time I am going across the street a few hundred yards to light the Nation's Christmas tree. I am going to tell the American people that today we are in a time of great trial. We are in a time of testing for our Nation, a time of uncertainty for our country.
I am going to tell them that there are, however, some signs of hope throughout the world.
In Asia I saw those signs myself, less than 2 months ago. In nation after nation I saw men and women who believe in the future for the first time in their lives. What makes them believe as they do? I will tell you.
You men make them believe. You and your comrades in arms in Vietnam. Because you have proven to them that as long as there is an America their liberty is as precious as ours. And you have told them much more eloquently than I could tell them that America does not fail them.
Is this worth the sacrifice that you men have made? Well, only you can answer that question. But I think I know what your answer would be. I think I know what each of you would say, because just before I went into this meeting to pursue peace in the Security Council room, I dictated a letter to a widow of a Vietnam veteran who had sent me his last letter home.
I want to read just two or three lines from it.
He said: "I have offered every excuse in the book, but I know why I am here and why I couldn't be any other place. The reason is because I do believe that we should be here and I do believe that principle, basic principles are enough for a man to die for .... At least the soldier knows why he is here--even me--we are here because we actually believe that our country is good enough to fight for, and even if necessary, die for.
"All we ask is that some good come out of it ....
"We have our troubles in America, but what little of the world I have seen doesn't hold a candle to what our country is .... I have sat here this night and looked in the faces of 18 young men--the oldest is 28 and I have talked to them about their homes and families and wives and sweethearts, and I cannot believe that these men who feel things so strongly could be deceived by any propaganda or by a first-class snow job.
"Every one of these kids knows what he wants. There is not a 'hero' in the group over here looking for glory or medals or any of that other garbage--they are here because they felt they were needed, that's all! They all have plans--plans that have been put off for a year while they 'do their bit.' Only two of them are 'career' soldiers. The rest are citizen soldiers who have stepped out from the crowd to do what they can."
This is a long and rambling letter. I said to Mrs. Foster, I have known many brave and wise men, but I wish I could have known the lieutenant. Then I would have known the best of men.
His letter is an extraordinary testament. I am privileged to share its inspiration.
He never wrote another letter. But the one he did write will live as long as men honor courage and bravery and men love freedom.
I wish I could tell you that what you have fought for, peace in the world, is just around the corner, but there will be some long and difficult days ahead, days that will require patience, judgments, and understanding.
Ambassador Lodge has just come home. He will be down to report to me tomorrow. Ambassador Goldberg will join us, as will Secretary McNamara. Every waking hour those who are charged with the terrifying responsibility of leading and directing and planning and working to preserve freedom will be grateful that there are men like you who have protected it so well so long.
I hope you have a good Christmas. You deserve it more than anyone I know.

Thank you so much.
Note: The President spoke at 3:07 p.m. in the East Room at the White House to a group of Vietnam war veterans who were patients in Washington area hospitals. During his remarks he referred to, among others, Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, Henry Cabot Lodge, U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Vietnam, and Arthur J. Goldberg, U.S. Representative to the United Nations.
He also referred to Mrs. Lincoln Foster of California, mother-in-law of Lt. John F. Cochran, from whose last letter the President had been reading.