Lyndon B. Johnson
December 12, 1964

Remarks to the Members of the Economic Opportunity Council.
I LOOK to this body as a domestic national security council for the war on poverty.
Your job is to help me in making policy and program decisions in waging this war.
This Council of Cabinet officers and heads of agencies was established by the Economic Opportunity Act to advise on "the coordination of antipoverty efforts by all segments of the Federal Government."
As provided for by statute, Sargent Shriver will serve as Chairman of this Council and will have responsibility for its operation.
I am also asking Vice President-elect Humphrey to take a leading role in the war on poverty. I want Mr. Shriver to work with him to be sure that this is a well-coordinated, concentrated attack on poverty throughout the country. I have also requested him to serve as honorary chairman of the Advisory Council set up by the Economic Opportunity Act.
The membership of this group of distinguished private citizens will be announced shortly.
I hope the Vice President-elect will assume a role similar to the one I filled as Chairman of the Peace Corps National Advisory Council.
There are four broad areas in which I expect you to exercise initiative and take particular responsibility:
First, to review major policy issues that arise in conducting the war against poverty.
Second, to weigh national priorities for program needs in the war on poverty, and to assess the ability of existing programs to meet those needs.
Third, to support an information system which will provide local officials and private groups with the facts they need in working with us in this effort to eliminate poverty.
Fourth, to make certain that the antipoverty programs respond to local needs and encourage the full development of community action.
Vice President-elect Humphrey and I will look to the Economic Opportunity Council for advice and support in each of these areas and I will rely heavily upon his and your recommendations.
I call upon the members of this Council to meet as often as necessary, to recommend whatever actions need to be taken, and to carry out whatever tasks must be done to wage this war effectively. Our objective is total victory--and we are going to attain it.
Note: The President spoke at 12:40 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House.
A White House release, dated January 28, 1965, announced the President's appointment that day of the members of the National Advisory Council. The release, giving the names and brief biographical sketches of the 14 members, noted that the Council would hold its first meeting February 3, 1965.
As printed, this item follows the prepared text released by the White House.