Lyndon B. Johnson
December 15, 1966

Remarks at the Unveiling of a Model of the U.S. Pavilion for the Canadian World's Fair EXPO '67.
THIS IS a very generous, thoughtful, and friendly thing for you to do to give me this invitation.
The Secretary of State talked to me, before leaving for the NATO meeting in Paris, about the possibility of accepting this invitation.
This is a very exciting project. I should like nothing better than to be able to be there some time in the spring. It is a little far distant to be firm.
A nation can be judged somewhat in its relations with other nations in the world by its relations with its neighbors. I am very proud of our relationship with Canada and the respect and affection which the American people have for your people.
I have just returned from a brief visit with a delightful friend, the President of Mexico. I hope that our Nation can always live at peace and friendship with our neighbors adjacent to our country.

I can think of nothing that would make me happier than for Mrs. Johnson to be able to join me in accepting your invitation. I shall certainly try to follow some kind of plan that will permit me to visit Canada in the days ahead, if you won't make me be too precise.

I just thank you for the honor.
Note: The President spoke at 12:04 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. During his remarks he referred to Secretary of State Dean Rusk and President Gustavo Diaz Ordaz of Mexico (see Items 639, 640). Present for the ceremony were Leonard Marks, Director of the United States Information Agency, A. Edgar Ritchie, Canadian Ambassador to the United States, Robert Winters, Canadian Minister of Trade and Commerce, Ambassador Pierre Dupuy, head of the Canadian World Exposition, R. Buckminster Fuller, architect of the U.S. pavilion, and Milton Fredman, Deputy U.S. Commissioner General for the exposition. Stanley R. Tupper is U.S. Commissioner General designate.
The invitation to which the President referred was extended by the Canadian officials present, who presented him with an honorary "passport" to the exposition. He visited EXPO '67 on May 25, 1967.
As printed above, this item follows the text of the White House press release.