Lyndon B. Johnson
December 29, 1967

Statement by the President Upon Signing Order Relating to Federal Participation in Regional Economic Development.
APPALACHIA teaches many lessons. Its recent progress tells us that the partnership of Federal, State, and local governments can work--in Appalachia and in other regions.
The national interest demands we do more to strengthen the economies and improve the lives of the millions of Americans in these vast areas. Boundaries of States do not define areas of need. Only by working together can adjoining States, with the assistance of the Federal Government, find common solutions to their common problems.
Much work awaits us in rebuilding the cities of America to meet the needs of growing populations. But we cannot afford to neglect the areas that lie beyond the cities or the people that live in them. They too must be permitted to share in America's great abundance.
The steps I take today will make the Federal Government a stronger, more efficient partner in meeting this complex challenge of our times.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House announcement accompanying the text of Executive Order 11386 (3 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 1778; 33 F.R. 5; 3 CFR, 1968 Comp.).
The announcement stated that the order (1) requires the Secretary of Commerce to provide effective liaison between the Federal Government and the six regional commissions for economic development, (2) gives the Secretary of Commerce responsibility for promoting the coordination of activities of the Federal Government relating to regional economic development, (3) directs each Federal department and agency to name a high-level official for regional economic development activities, and (4) establishes a new Federal Advisory Council on Regional Economic Development to assist in coordinating all regional economic development activities of the Federal Government.
The announcement further stated that "regional commissions now exist for Appalachia, New England, Upper Great Lakes, Ozarks, Four Corners, and Coastal Plains. In each, the States involved work with the Federal Government to develop comprehensive strategies combining Federal, State, and local resources to foster rapid growth and development in the region."
The statement was released at San Antonio, Texas.