Lyndon B. Johnson
February 01, 1968

Remarks at the Signing Ceremony for the Economic Report.
WE WANT to welcome the Governors who were kind enough to come to this little ceremony and we want to apologize to you for detaining you for a few moments.
We have come here this morning to sign this report and transmit it.
It tells of the achievement and abundance such as no other nation has ever known. But it also tells us a good deal more than that. It tells us of problems that prosperity can leave unsolved, or even that prosperity has created.
All the graphs in this report point upward. The figures climb and the superlatives abound. But here too there is a warning-a caution to all of our people and their elected representatives, and they cannot ignore it if our prosperity is to be protected and enlarged.

From the pages of this report history will write its own record of the American economic miracle.

--Never has our economy been so prosperous for so long.

--Never has employment been so high and affluence so widespread and poverty so limited.
This report sees no halt. In the year ahead, if we are fiscally responsible and act accordingly:

--Our gross national product will grow about $60 billion.

--96 percent of our labor force will remain employed.

But Whitman said, "... that from any fruition of success, no matter what, shall come forth something to make a greater struggle necessary."
So it is also true of the American economy. We have mastered the challenges of general unemployment and sluggish growth. But in doing this, successes have brought additional and new challenges: the need to check inflation and the need to reduce the persistent deficit in our international payments.
These challenges call for sacrifices. I do not think they are really great sacrifices considering what our people have gone through to achieve what we have today. But they do call for sacrifices, to be sure, but more than some seem willing to pay now.
In January 1967, in August 1967, in January 1968, and now again here in February, I plead with Congress to enact a tax of a single penny on the dollar of the average American's income. I am asking for one penny out of a dollar from the average American.
This tax would still leave income-tax rates for American families far below what it was when I became their President.

So I ask again today:

--not because any of us like taxes,

--not because I enjoy asking for higher taxes,

--not because a tax bill will solve all of our problems,

--not because our economy will explode this year without this tax.
But I ask the Congress to act promptly because I believe the tax bill is an essential parr, a necessary ingredient to a balanced and considered program that will help us:

--to slow down price increases,

--to cut our balance of payments deficit,

--to maintain a smooth flow of credit, and finally

--to insure us against risks that I don't believe this Nation ought to take--because I don't believe we need to take them.
In short, I believe our Nation needs this tax bill to conduct, properly and prudently, the affairs of a great democracy.
Its passage would be an act of fiscal responsibility that would help the world maintain its faith in the dollar--the American dollar-and help the world maintain its faith in the responsibility of the American people.
The executive branch has its own responsibility. Recognizing this, I am establishing a Cabinet Committee on Price Stability. This Committee on Price Stability is to deal with the many aspects of price and wage problems, with its bottlenecks and with its inefficiencies.
Once again, I plead for the full cooperation of American leaders of business and labor. I ask that they devote themselves anew to resisting the false lure of higher prices and excessive wage increases--and the deadly spiral which saps the strength of our prosperity.
We are charged by history to invest billions to defend freedom abroad--and we are doing that today. Yet we cannot and must not stand still at home.
This Nation can afford to meet its responsibilities to the poor among us. Poverty is declining, but even today I am ashamed to say that one American out of every seven is still poor among us.
In the wealth of our abundance there is enough to continue our attack, I think, on poverty and the evils that attend it: poor housing, inadequate education and training, ill health and personal frustration and despair, and still defend our freedoms and protect and preserve our liberties.
We have the wealth. The question is, do we have the wisdom and do we have the will and do we have the determination to apply strength to remedy weakness, to give up a part of what we have as an investment in the future that I think will pay good returns?
As we meet here in the Cabinet Room this morning in this distinguished company, the world watches our every act. Some of the leading financial prognosticators expect us to return to the boom and bust patterns of the past. Some look for the surrender of America's economic leadership in the world and the diminishing of America's economic power in the world.
Those who await our decline and our demise, I hope, will find little encouragement. The Economic Report charts for us an entirely different course. It points the way to a balanced and to an enduring prosperity, it points the way to expanded job opportunities for all, it points the way to strong leadership in international economic affairs, and it points the way to the hope--the long-sought hope--that America will rid itself of poverty in this generation.
We have much to be thankful for. We have much to be grateful for. We have much to protect if we only realize how fortunate we are.
I have no doubt that we will do what is necessary to see that that good fortune is continued.

Thank you very much.
[At this point, the President signed the report He then resumed speaking.]
This is the first pen I used to sign this Economic Report. This is the fifth Economic Report that I have signed.
This is my 37th year in government. Throughout all these years I have tried to look to leaders from whom I could learn much by both precept and example.
I am going to give this first pen to what I look upon as an ideal public servant of the greatest country in the world. He is the kind of man whom I wish every man in the Government was like. He is modest and able, firm, and strong, compassionate and determined and guided by only one rule--the greatest good for the greatest number.
His leaving here to take a post abroad will leave an empty spot and a certain amount of sadness for me because I have relied upon him as I have looked to my own family. But I have great satisfaction knowing that in this critical international period when we need to improve our relations and strengthen them with our friends in Italy and Germany and the other countries of that area, one of the ablest economic minds that this Nation has produced and one of its most dedicated servants will be the spokesman for the President and the United States of America.
Consoled only by this thought do I willingly bid him adieu.
Note: The President spoke at 11:03 a.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Governors Dewey Bartlett of Oklahoma, Lester Maddox of Georgia, Charles L. Terry, Jr., of Delaware, John A. Volpe of Massachusetts, John Bell Williams of Mississippi, William L. Guy of North Dakota, and Hulett C. Smith of West Virginia, who were in Washington to attend the Presidential Prayer Breakfast (see Item 43).
The tax bill to which the President referred was approved June 28 as the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968. For his statement upon signing the measure, see Item 343.
The Cabinet Committee on Price Stability was established by the President on February 23, 1968 (see Items 89, 90).
The first pen used by the President in signing the Economic Report was presented by him to Gardner Ackley, outgoing Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, who had been nominated as U.S. Ambassador to Italy.