Lyndon B. Johnson
February 09, 1968

Statement by the President Upon Signing Order Authorizing Transitional Civil Service Appointments to "Vietnam Era" Veterans.
I HAVE signed an Executive order by which the Federal Government, the Nation's largest employer, will provide a special opportunity to Vietnam veterans to further their education while working in the public interest.
This Executive order--combining incentives for better jobs and better education-was discussed in my January 30 message on servicemen and veterans.
Under the order, Vietnam veterans who meet job requirements will be eligible to enter Federal employment--in "transitional appointments" at the five lowest civil service levels--without taking a competitive examination.
A qualifying veteran is one who served on active duty in our Armed Forces on or after August 5, 1964, who has completed less than 1 year of education beyond high school, and who meets all other civil service standards. He must agree to pursue an approved part-time or full-time educational program. His continued employment will depend on satisfactory job performance and educational progress.
The new program will not affect the budget and staff reductions I have ordered for Federal agencies. Vacancies in a wide range of skills and grades exist because of personnel turnover. And many of these skills are in short supply.
For those with the necessary initiative and ability, this new program--together with the GI bill--offers a chance for both further education and better jobs.
I hope that the plan will be a model to private employers and to State and local governments. Chairman John Macy of the Civil Service Commission has assured me that the transitional appointments program will receive high priority in the Federal Government. I hope that this, too, will set a precedent for employers throughout the country.
Note: The President referred to Executive Order 11397 (4 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 270; 33 F.R. 2833; 3 CFR, 1968 Comp., p. 100).