Lyndon B. Johnson
February 17, 1968

Remarks at Fort Bragg, North Carolina
General Seitz, General Johnson, General Walt, troopers:
Wherever you are, wherever you go, each of you knows that you have with you always the devotion, the concern, the prayers of all of those dear to you and to whom you are very dear.
As you depart once again to answer the call from afar, I come here today as your President to tell you that on your journey the hearts of this Nation and the hopes of men in many nations fly with you and will follow with you until this duty is done.
It is never easy for men to leave. It is never easy to ask men to leave home and happiness for duty far, far away.
But the duties of freedom have never been easy. For your Nation, for all of its people, those duties may become more demanding, the trials may become more difficult, the tests more challenging, before we or the world shall know, again, that peace on this planet is once more secure.
In every capital where there was a prospect, in every forum where there was a promise, your Nation and its leadership has sought peace.
The answer of the enemy in Vietnam has been pillage. The enemy has launched a major counter offensive against the Government and the people of South Vietnam. He has marshaled his power around the cities of South Vietnam, in I Corps and elsewhere.
After 2 1/2 years in which he has seen his grip on the people weaken, he has finally decided to try to win now--this year. His aim is to shake the Government of South Vietnam to its foundations, to shake the confidence of the South Vietnamese people, to destroy the will of your people--the American people--to see this struggle through.
In his first attempt 3 weeks ago, he failed. He did inflict terrible wounds on the people, and he took terrible losses himself. He did prove, again, what the world has long known--that terrorists can strike and can kill without warning before the forces of order can throw them back.
And now he has struck again. At this very hour, a second wave of terrorists is striking the cities. Our forces are ready. I know they will acquit themselves, as they always have, however tough the battle becomes, and wherever it comes.
There has never been a finer fighting force wearing the American uniform than you and the one that you are going to join.
We long to see this bloodshed come to an end. Month after month we sought to find an honorable solution to the struggle that has torn Vietnam for 20 years. The enemy's answer was clear. It is written in the towns and the cities that he struck 3 weeks ago-in the homeless thousands who fled the scenes of battle--in the army that he has massed in the North near the DMZ.
And our answer--your answer--must be just as clear: unswerving resolution to resist these ruthless attacks, as we have resisted every other.
Now remember this: You, each of you, represent America's will--America's commitment-in a land where our own security, as well as South Vietnam's freedom, is now facing a deadly challenge. Men who have never been elected to anything are threatening an elected government and the painfully achieved institutions of democracy.
You--each of you--have a great role to play in this struggle. I believe--I know-that you will serve the cause of freedom just as your forefathers served it. You will serve it with bravery, you will serve it with skill, you will serve it with devotion.
We--all America--are proud of you. I came here to speak in behalf of all America, and to tell you that you are our finest because you are the Airborne.
[At this point the troops responded with "All the way, sir." The President then resumed speaking.]
God bless you and keep you.
Note: The President spoke at 5:05 p.m. In his opening words he referred to Maj. Gen. Richard J. Seitz, Commander of the 82nd Airborne Division, Gen. Harold K. Johnson, Army Chief of Staff, and Lt. Gen. Lewis W. Walt, Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps.
APP Note: In the "Public Papers of the Presidents," this transcript is included as item #81 along with two additional transcripts recording visits to different military facilities under the heading, "Remarks During a Weekend Tour of Military Installations: February 17-18, 1968". The American Presidency Project distinguishes each event.