Lyndon B. Johnson
February 07, 1968

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the President of the Commission of the European Communities.
THE PRESIDENT and Mr. Jean Rey, President of the Commission of the European Communities, met at the White House on February 7. During his visit to Washington, Mr. Rey, accompanied by Vice President Hellwig and Commissioner Deniau, is also meeting with the Vice President, the Secretary of State, and other Cabinet and sub-Cabinet officials.
The President and Mr. Rey confirmed their belief in the need for continued progress toward the unity of Europe. The President reaffirmed the support of the United States for the progress of the European Communities. A strong and democratic Western Europe working as an equal partner with the United States would help to build a peaceful, prosperous and just world order. Both the United States and the European Communities recognize their responsibilities to the developing countries in expanding export earnings and development.
The President reviewed his balance of payments program with Mr. Rey and emphasized the firm intention of the United States to take the necessary action to restore equilibrium. The President and Mr. Rey recognized the need for both surplus and deficit countries to continue and intensify their individual and common efforts to achieve a better equilibrium in the international balance of payments.
The closest cooperation between the United States and the European Communities is necessary to ensure that international adjustment takes place under conditions of continued economic growth with financial stability. In particular, they agreed that the achievements of the Kennedy Round must be preserved, that protectionist measures should be avoided and that further progress should be made in the elimination of barriers to trade.
Mr. Rey told the President of his satisfaction with a meeting held on February 7 between his party and senior officials of the United States Government on matters of common concern pertaining to the economic interrelationship of Europe and the United States. The President and Mr. Rey agreed similar high level consultations would be useful in the future.