Lyndon B. Johnson
February 19, 1964

Message to the Sixth Plenary Session of the U.N. Economic Commission for Africa.
I AM very pleased to extend my warmest greetings to the Sixth Plenary Session of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. It is a tribute to the wisdom of the leaders of the independent African countries that they have determined to cooperate in economic and political fields. The establishment of the Organization of African Unity last year and the continued support of the ECA are solid manifestations of the determination of the African peoples to fulfill their aspirations in a constructive and harmonious manner.
The ECA has just completed five years of work. It has made substantial contributions to economic development of the continent. The program of the ECA is ambitious and far-reaching in attempting to meet needs in a wide variety of economic and social fields. This program is commendable for its breadth of perspective and the members of the Commission are to be congratulated for entrusting so many important matters to a U.N. organization which is designed to serve the needs of all African peoples. The Commission can point with pride to its accomplishments in a number of fields.
The United States Government has consistently supported the United Nations as the instrument best designed to insure a peaceful world in which all men can live in harmony and strive for the common good. The work of the ECA and the specialized agencies has been an integral part of a U.N. effort in seeking these objectives. for this reason the United States heartily supports efforts which are being undertaken by such bodies of the U.N. as the Economic Commission for Africa.
The United States warmly sympathizes with the aspirations of African nations and welcomes the growing spirit of cooperation throughout the continent. I extend my best wishes for the continued progress of the African peoples and the success of the Economic Commission for Africa.
Note: The United Nations Economic Commission for Africa met at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, February 19-March 2, 1964. The President's statement was read at the opening session.