Lyndon B. Johnson
February 07, 1968

Remarks Upon Signing Order Providing for the Coordination by the Attorney General of Federal Law Enforcement and Crime Prevention Programs
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, Members of the Congress, Members of the Cabinet:
We have come here this morning to take an action that will result in this Nation really facing up to its major crime problem.
For decades now we have slighted our system of criminal justice. For decades now we have tolerated conditions that nourish crime. And we are paying the price and learning the results:

--Thousands of our young people are labeled with a criminal record while they are still just boys and girls.

--Property that is valued at literally billions of dollars is lost each and every year through crime.

--A dangerous new threat to the health and well-being of all of our young people has arisen right here among us in the form of drug addiction.
--Tens of thousands are killed or injured each year by criminal acts. I heard on the television early this morning that some 53,000 people died in highway accidents last year and a substantial part of those were because of people who were under the influence of alcohol, who should not have been driving at all. Thousands more of our people are afraid to even use our streets and almost everybody who lives in a metropolitan area-particularly our women--feel insecure in their homes.

--Our law enforcement agencies are terribly undermanned.

--Our court system--municipal, State, Federal--is clogged. Our correctional system is poorly equipped.
Now this year--this year---this Year of our Lord 1968, the forces of law and order must capture the initiative in the battle against crime.
We have appointed national commissions of experts who have researched the libraries, heard the testimony and explored the back alleys, but there is one thing that we all agree upon and that we all know--and which has been a fact since this Nation was founded. That is: that the frontline against crime is the statehouse, and is the city hall, and is the police precinct, and is the home.
Now a mayor can talk about what Washington ought to do. And a Governor can talk about States' rights in one speech and a national police force in the other. But all of us know that these laws are made in the States--and generally speaking, they are violated in the States. And in most instances, they must be enforced in the States.
Under our constitutional system, the prevention and the punishment of crime in the streets is committed to our State and to our local governments. There is where the task of securing public order is ultimately, finally, and actually going to be accomplished-if it is accomplished.
Now, this morning I want to repeat again what I have said again and again and again, over and over; that the full resources of the Federal Government are pledged to help in this task. We will supplement these efforts, but we will never supplant them. We are not going to hold out hope that any national police force will ever relieve the local police, the local sheriff, the local constable, the State police, the highway patrol, the local district attorney, or the local judge--because the Congress does not pass the laws on theft or murder or rape or robbery.
Now, I have urged the Congress to do what it could do to supplement the work of the local and State governments in this country. I am asking them to do this year what I hoped they would do last year on the plan we worked up the year before: that is to act--A-C-T---on legislation that we think is needed in this country.
The 90th Congress, I hope, will become-I think it must become--the Congress that gave the American people the security that they demand and the justice they deserve.
Very shortly there will arrive at the Congress a special message from the President on crime. It is not just another Presidential message. It contains the recommendations of experts from both parties and from various branches of Government.
I spent more than an hour last Saturday speaking to distinguished jurists from all over the land. I preceded that with talks with attorneys general from throughout the country. I met with committees from the Governors' Conference. This subject has been discussed and explored and studied and researched with all of them. Now the time has come to act.
This message contains a 22-point specific program of action. Some of it requires legislation. Some requires action by the Attorney General.
The first step is to coordinate the Federal Government's efforts so that each bureau is not running in different directions, like a chicken with its head cut off, and not knowing what they are doing.
Our law enforcement and our crime control efforts are spread throughout this vast system of government. We have some of it in the Treasury, some of it in HEW, some of it in Labor, and HUD, and certainly in poverty--OEO.
And, of course, finally we look to the Department of Justice because there we have the prosecution arm, the legal arm, and there is symbolized the most competent, able, and alert investigative arm that any country has ever produced, in the FBI built by J. Edgar Hoover.
Now, the total of all of these efforts, together with the new programs that we are asking for today, will result in our putting together $550 million--that is more than a half-billion dollars--for the next fiscal year. Now this is an increase of more than 25 percent over last year.
I am going to shortly sign this Executive order which gives the Attorney General, Ramsey Clark, the complete and final authority to coordinate and act in connection with the criminal law activities of all Federal departments, all Federal agencies. He is the "Mr. Big"--the last word on it. I want all of them to understand it and hear it loud and clear.
I want you to understand it, too, and I want him to understand it.
He has the power and the authority--and I believe the ability--to take all these Federal programs and put them together and to coordinate them; to supplement the actions of the State and those who talk about States rights; to supplement the local law enforcement agencies and to work with the crime prevention agencies.
You don't have to remember any name except Clark, Ramsey Clark. You can call him direct if you want any action.
He is setting up a very special office in the Justice Department to carry out this work. We hope this will mean that local law enforcement and all of their agencies will be able to contact a single office in Washington for information, for help, for counsel, for action concerning any supplementary programs that the Federal Government can supply that will help them to do the job that the Constitution placed upon them.
This is the first step in our crime program this year.
We have before us this morning men who have labored long and late in this field for years--Senator McClellan, whose name, like Mr. Hoover's, is known throughout this land as one who has put up a gallant fight against crime; Chairman Celler; the distinguished minority member, Mr. McCulloch here from the State of Ohio; Mr. Dawson; Mr. Holifield; all of these men have pioneered our legislative efforts. They are helping with our reorganization efforts, the Government reorganization.
The Federal Government is all on board not only in the executive agency, but in the legislative agency. We have had numerous conferences with the Members of the House and with Senator McClellan in the Senate' The last one was last night.
Now this message today outlines the additional steps that the President and the executive branch of the Government think that we must take here and the Congress must take yonder and that must be taken out in our homes and must be taken in our shops and our buses and our subways and our streets.
Americans--of all races--want and deserve better law enforcement. And we intend to give it to them.
It may require some extra effort and it may require some extra money to get more police and better police, to use better methods. But whatever it takes, I am convinced that the average American father and mother will be willing to pay the price until we drive crime from our midst in these United States.

Thank you very much.
[At this point, the President signed the Executive order. He then resumed speaking.]
I just took a small number of these pens this morning because I am going to save most of them to sign that safe streets bill.
We met this week with some of our mayors. We are meeting later this month with all the Governors. They are coming here and the first topic on the agenda is going to be crime and how the States can appoint crime commissions and work with the cities. They can all study their laws, pass whatever new laws they need, and then be sure whatever they pass is enforced.
Then we want to do anything we can to work with them, support them and help them in that effort.
By the time the Governors get here, we hope we will have made substantial progress on our safe streets bill. That will be our primary action this year.
Note: The President spoke at 11:24 a.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House upon signing Executive Order 11396 (4 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 131; 33 F.R. 2689; 3 CFR, 1968 Comp., p.99). During his remarks he referred to, among others, Senator John L. McClellan of Arkansas, and Representatives Emanuel Celler of New York, Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, William M. McCulloch of Ohio, William L. Dawson of Illinois, and Chet Holifield of California.
For the President's special message to Congress on crime and law enforcement, and for his statement upon signing the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, see Items 59 and 320.