Lyndon B. Johnson
February 07, 1968

Remarks Upon Announcing Plans for the Rebuilding of the Silver Bridge, West Virginia-Ohio.
Secretary Boyd, Governor Smith, Members of Congress, members of the task force:
I am pleased to announce a Federal-State program for the immediate reconstruction of the bridge between Gallipolis, Ohio, and Point Pleasant, West Virginia. This plan is a splendid example of constructive interaction between the National and State governments that is essential to modern America.
The tragic collapse of the Silver Bridge on December 15 has been a serious blow to this section of Appalachia:

--The bridge was part of a major traffic artery between Columbus and Charleston,

--It was an important economic asset to the whole region of southeast Ohio and northwest West Virginia.

--Its absence is impeding the area's economic development.

--The costs in lost time and extra mileage of detoured traffic amount to more than $1 million a month--all in addition to the direct losses to businesses in the area.
A Federal task force, headed by Secretary Boyd, working with the Governors of the two States, has carefully considered what the loss of this bridge means to the people who need it.
I have accepted their recommendation. We are going to roll up our sleeves and begin work on a new bridge right away--and we will rush it to completion.
The Appalachian Regional Commission will allocate $2 million from their access road funds. These funds will be administered by the Department of Transportation in coo operation with the two States. The rest of the cost--about $4.5 million--will come from regular highway funds.
We 'plan an immediate start on both design and construction. New traffic approaches will be built simultaneously with the bridge. The use of modular sections will allow the deck of the new bridge to be built at the same time as the superstructure.
Our objective is to build this bridge in half the normal time. The extra costs of this crash program are justified and outweighed by the daily economic losses caused by the lack of this important traffic link.
This is good news. I am grateful to Secretary Boyd and the members of his task force: Governor Daniel, Secretary Resor, and Chairman Fleming, and to the Appalachian Regional Commission. I especially want to thank Governor Smith of West Virginia and Governor Rhodes of Ohio. I think you all can be proud of a real service to your people.
Note: The President spoke at 11:30 a.m. in his office at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd and Governor Hulett C. Smith of West Virginia. At the close of his remarks he referred to Price Daniel, Director of the Office of Emergency Planning and former Governor of Texas, Stanley R. Resor, Secretary of the Army, Joe W. Fleming II, Federal Cochairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission, and James Rhodes, Governor of Ohio. For the President's telegram to the Governors and to Representatives of West Virginia and Ohio following the Silver Bridge collapse, and for his statement upon establishing the task force to study the tragedy and conduct a nationwide bridge safety survey, see 1967 volume, this series, Book II, Items 552 and 558.
As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.