Lyndon B. Johnson
January 30, 1967

The President's Remarks Upon Being Advised That He Would Receive the Franklin D. Roosevelt Birthday Memorial Award
MR. O'Connor and Governor Harriman do me a great honor by bringing the decision of the committee to me this morning.
Mrs. Johnson has just been here. We have looked over a portrait that is being presented to the White House collection of President Roosevelt. It will be officially presented tomorrow afternoon. We hope it will ultimately hang over the center of the fireplace.
This award is greatly appreciated by me. President Roosevelt was one of the great leaders of our country and one of my great leaders.
As a young man he stimulated my great interest in economic and political matters. I remember the first time I called on him in this room when I was a young secretary just becoming the NYA Administrator.
From that day until this moment, I have been a student of his thoughts, his hopes, his achievements, and have tried to in some small degree follow them and be guided by them.
He had no two greater friends in this world than Mr. O'Connor and Governor Harriman. I think it particularly appropriate that they should come on behalf of the committee to make this award.
I shall maintain an interest in the work of the committee as the years come and go. I want to express a deep gratitude for your thoughtfulness.
Note: The President spoke at 11 :30 a.m. in his office at the White House. His opening words referred to Basil O'Connor, president of the National Foundation-March of Dimes, and Ambassador at Large W. Averell Harriman. Mr. O'Connor and Ambassador Harriman, as chairman and honorary chairman of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Birthday Memorial Award Committee, informed the President of his selection as the first recipient of the award, which is to be presented annually to the person who "most exemplifies the ideals of Franklin D. Roosevelt." The announcement, made on the 85th anniversary of the birth of Franklin D. Roosevelt, noted that formal presentation of the award would take place at the New York Hilton Hotel on March 23. See also Item 28.