Lyndon B. Johnson
January 07, 1965

Statement by the President on His Message on the Nation's Health.
THOMAS JEFFERSON once said: "An attention to health should take the place of every other object."
In keeping with Mr. Jefferson's concept of national priorities, I am today asking the Congress to make sure that the health of our Nation is the foundation for all our aspirations.
I am proposing that every person over 65 years of age be spared the darkness of sickness without hope. I am asking that every person, under social security, during his working life contribute a modest amount, so that his basic health services can be financed. It will help meet the costs of hospital bills without in any way interfering with the freedom to choose their doctor or to choose their hospital.
I am asking for the establishment of regional treatment centers throughout our entire Nation where the most advanced diagnosis and treatment can be made accessible to millions of people who cannot now get such treatment. We have within our reach the means and the knowledge to begin a massive attack on heart disease, cancer, stroke, and other crippling diseases.
I am asking for a program to bring new hope to the mentally ill and the mentally retarded.
I am asking for programs to improve the care of the health of our preschool and school-age children--as well as help our States and communities improve their health services to the needs of our Nation.
I am asking for additional funds to construct more medical schools, new funds to help these schools cover their operating costs, and to begin a system of scholarships for needy medical and dental students.
I am asking for the means to make sure that all drugs used are safe and effective.
Whatever we do or hope to do depends upon the health of our people. We cannot be satisfied until all Americans have available to them the best medical treatment that the best medical men can devise.
The proposals I have made to the Congress today are necessary and they are attainable. The urgency of them is clear. We must begin now. If we delay we will only deny our people the health and the happiness that can be theirs.
I am confident that a wise and understanding Congress will write a record of achievement in health that will be remembered by grateful generations to come.
Note: The President read the statement at 3:33 p.m. in the Theater at the White House for a video tape recording.
For statements or remarks upon signing related legislation, see Items 394, 401, 406, 410, 551, 579, 581.