Lyndon B. Johnson
January 18, 1968

Statement by the President on the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty To Be Presented to the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee.
I AM most heartened to learn that the Soviet Union will join the United States as Cochairman of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee, to submit a complete text of a treaty to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and that this draft treaty will be submitted today to the Committee in Geneva. This revised text includes an agreed safeguards article and other revisions that will make the treaty widely acceptable.
We have worked long and hard in an effort to draft a text that reflects the views of other nations. I believe the draft presented today represents a major accomplishment in meeting these legitimate interests.
The text submitted today must now be considered further by all governments. Following its review by the conference in Geneva, it will be considered by the General Assembly in the spring. It is my fervent hope that I will be able to submit it to the Senate of the United States for its advice and consent this year.
The draft treaty text submitted today clearly demonstrates an important fact. In the face of the differences that exist in the world, the two nations which carry the heaviest responsibility for averting the catastrophe of nuclear war can, with sufficient patience and determination, move forward. They can move forward toward the goal which all men of good will seek--a reversal of the arms race and a more secure peace based on our many common interests on this one small planet.
I believe history will look on this treaty as a landmark in the effort of mankind to avoid nuclear disaster while ensuring that all will benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
This treaty will be a testament of man's faith in the future. In that spirit I commend it to all.
Note: The text of the treaty is printed in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 59, p. 9).
For the President's remarks at the signing of the treaty on July 1, 1968, see Item 349.