Lyndon B. Johnson
January 13, 1969

Letter to Committee Chairmen on the Tariff on Imports of Reprocessed Wool Fabrics and Blends.
Dear Mr. Chairman:
On October 24, 1968, I signed H.R. 653, a bill which amended the tariff schedules of the United States to establish a uniform tariff on imports of re-processed wool fabrics or blends of such fabrics.
At the time of signing this bill, I indicated my concern that the tariff rate it established on these fabrics could result in a duty which was so high that it was not in the national interest. In an effort to avoid this undesirable result, I directed the Tariff Commission to study the effect of this legislation and make recommendations as to what simple ad valorem rate or rates of duty would provide a reasonable degree of tariff protection.
The Tariff Commission completed its work and reported to me on December 31. A majority of the Commission concluded that an ad valorem rate of 55% is equitable and will provide a reasonable degree of tariff protection for the U.S.. domestic industry.
Accordingly, I have today directed the Department of State to prepare and submit to you draft legislation amending H.R. 653 to reduce the duty on these fabrics to a 55% ad valorem rate. I urge you to introduce this legislation at the earliest practical date and give prompt consideration to it in the Committee. It is my hope that both Houses of the Congress will see fit to take favorable action on this measure.
Attached to this letter is a copy of my signing statement on H.R. 653 and the report of the Tariff Commission. I have today requested the Commission to make its report public.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: This is the text of similar letters addressed to the Honorable Russell Long, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Finance, and to the Honorable Wilbur Mills, Chairman of the House Committee on Ways and Means. The letter to Representative Mills contains an additional sentence at the end of the second paragraph, as follows: "I was pleased that you saw fit to join in this request."
For a statement by the President upon signing H.R. 653, see Item 562.
The Tariff Commission report is entitled "Certain Wool Fabrics; Report to the President on Investigation No. 332-58 Under Section 332(g) of the Tariff Act of 1930" (To Publication 275; 52 pp., processed).