Lyndon B. Johnson
January 24, 1967

Proclamation 3764—National Safe Boating Week, 1967

Pleasure boating has become one of America's favorite pastimes. Last year, more than 40 million Americans took to the water in more than eight million pleasure boats. They also added nearly $3 billion to our economy.
This growing use of our waters must be accompanied by a greater awareness of safety. For the more boats in use, the greater the potential hazard. If we are to insure the full enjoyment of boating, and to avoid needless injury, loss of life, and destruction of property, we must pay increased attention to the basic principles of boating safety.
Boating organizations, the boating industry, and Federal and State agencies must share responsibility for promoting boating safety by informing the public of safety regulations and recommended safety practices. Only through such concerted community effort can boating be made one of our safest recreational sports, as well as one of the most popular.
To focus national attention on the importance of boating safety, the Congress by a joint resolution approved June 4, 1958 (72 Stat. 179), has requested the President to proclaim annually the week which includes July 4 as National Safe Boating Week:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the week beginning July 2, 1967, as National Safe Boating Week.
I encourage all Americans using our waterways to learn and observe boating safety practices and emergency procedures, and to minimize the injury, loss of life, and destruction of property resulting from such boating accidents as occur. I urge them to extend courteous treatment to their fellow boatmen during this week and throughout the year.
I also invite the Governors of the States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and other areas subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to provide, for the observance of this week.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this twenty-fourth day of January in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-seven, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-first.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
DEAN RUSK
Secretary of State