Lyndon B. Johnson
January 30, 1964

Remarks Upon Conferring the American Heart Association Award Upon Admiral Rickover
Admiral Rickover, ladies and gentlemen:
This is a most happy occasion for me.
It is not often that the President, as Commander in Chief, can exercise his powers so beneficially twice in 1 week in recognition of just one man. On Saturday, Admiral Rickover will begin one of the shortest retirements on record. He enters retired status, but his countrymen and I have recalled him to his normal duties on Monday morning unless, of course, he already is at his desk on Sunday.
For me to bestow upon Admiral Rickover the Heart of the Year Award this week is only to recognize in another way the continuing contribution which he has always made to our national life. Our national security and atomic programs, our educational system, our way of life, have all felt his influence. His mind is like a restless sea; it pounds against the impossible and wears it down to the possible. He never heard the phrase "It can't be done," and because he never heard it, he never believed it.
All things are possible when God lets loose a thinker and a doer in this world. In my opinion, Admiral Rickover is that kind of a man. His heart attack in 1961 only briefly slowed him down. Almost without breaking stride, he took up where he left off to continue his work, still the tough-minded, hard-working, brilliant man of character. As a matter of fact, it may well be said, after seeing what Admiral Rickover has done recently, that heart attacks are really good for you these days.
The inscription on the medallion of the 1964 Heart of the Year Award reads:
"His faith, courage, and achievement in meeting the personal challenge of heart disease have inspired people everywhere with new hope and the determination to conquer our Nation's leading health enemy."
As a member of the Rickover fan Club, and also the Heart Club, I am glad to present you this award, Admiral Rickover.
Note: The ceremony was held at noon in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The text of Admiral Rickover's response was also released.
Vice Admiral Hyman G. Rickover was serving as Assistant Chief for Nuclear Propulsion, Bureau of Ships, Department of the Navy, and also as Manager, Naval Reactors, Division of Reactor Development, Atomic Energy Commission.