Lyndon B. Johnson
January 01, 1964

Exchange of New Year Greetings Between the United States and the Soviet Union.
[ Released January 1, 1964. Dated December 30, 1963 ]
Dear Chairman Khrushchev and Chairman Brezhnev:
The old year has brought significant breakthroughs in many areas of human endeavor. But all the work of the chemist in the laboratory, the scientist in space, and the agronomist in the field will be in vain unless we can learn to live together in peace. No feat of physical science can compare to the feat of political science which brings a just peace to earth.
The American people and their Government have set the strengthening of peace as their highest purpose in the New Year. I myself am wholly committed to the search for better understanding among peoples everywhere. "Peace on Earth, Good Will Toward Men" need not be an illusion; we can make it a reality. The time for simply talking about peace, however, has passed--1964 should be a year in which we take further steps toward that goal. In this spirit I shall strive for the further improvement of relations between our two countries. In our hands have been placed the fortunes of peace and the hope of millions; it is my fervent hope that we are good stewards of that trust.
On behalf of the American people and myself, I extend cordial greetings and best wishes for the coming year to you and your families and to the peoples of the Soviet Union.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Nikita Khrushchev, Chairman, Council of Ministers, U.S.S.R.; Leonid Brezhnev, Chairman, Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, Moscow, U.S.S.R.]
Note: The Soviet leaders' message follows:
My dear Mr. President:
On the eve of the New Year 1964, we want to extend to the American people and you and your family personally on behalf of the people of the Soviet Union and ourselves New Year's greetings and very best wishes. The past year was marked by a significant improvement in the approach to the solutions of urgent international problems and in the development of Soviet-American relations. The conclusion of the Moscow treaty limiting nuclear testing was a good beginning, and demonstrable evidence of the fact that, given a realistic assessment of the actual world situation, cooperation of governments in resolving urgent international problems and achieving mutually satisfactory agreements is entirely possible. We would like to hope that the coming year will be marked by further significant successes, both in the resolution of important international problems and the improvement of relations between our countries, in the interest of the Soviet and American peoples and the interests of strengthening world peace.
N. KHRUSHCHEV
L. BREZHNEV
The messages were released at Austin, Tex.