Lyndon B. Johnson
January 31, 1967

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report on U.S. Aeronautics and Space Activities.
To the Congress of the United States:
America's space and aeronautics programs made brilliant progress in 1966. We developed our equipment and refined our knowledge to bring travel and exploration beyond earth's atmosphere measurably closer. And we played a major part in preparing for the peaceful use of outer space.
In December the United Nations, following this country's lead, reached agreement on the Outer Space Treaty. At that time I said it had "historical significance for the new age of space exploration." It bars weapons of mass destruction from space. It restricts military activities on celestial bodies. It guarantees access to all areas by all nations.
GEMINI manned missions were completed with a final record of constructive and dramatic achievement. Our astronauts spent more than 1,900 pilot hours in orbit. They performed pioneering rendezvous and docking experiments. They "walked" in space outside their vehicles for about 12 hours.
We orbited a total of 95 spacecraft around the earth and sent five others on escape flights, a record number of successful launches for the period. We launched weather satellites, communications satellites, and orbiting observatories. We performed solar experiments and took hundreds of pictures of the moon from LUNAR ORBITERS. SURVEYOR I landed gently on the moon and then returned over 11,000 pictures of its surroundings for scientific examination.
Major progress was made during the year on the APOLLO-SATURN moon program and the MANNED ORBITING LABORATORY.
These accomplishments--and the promise of more to come--are the fruits of the greatest concerted effort ever undertaken by any nation to advance human knowledge and activity. Space, so recently a mystery, now affects and benefits the lives of all Americans.
Our national investment in space has stimulated the invention and manufacture of a flood of new products. Our new knowledge has made us more secure as a Nation and more effective as leaders in the search for peace. This knowledge is hastening the ultimate solution of social and economic problems that combined to obstruct peace.
It is with pride and pleasure that I transmit this record of achievement to you the members of Congress. Without your support, no achievement would be possible.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

January 31, 1967
Note: The report is entitled "Report to the Congress from the President of the United States, United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, 1966" (171 pp., processed). A brief summary of the report is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 3, P. 149).