Lyndon B. Johnson
July 02, 1966

Executive Order 11289—National Advisory Commission on Selective Service
WHEREAS since the days of the militia it has been the tradition of our Nation that we entrust its defense not just to a standing army but to all citizens; and
WHEREAS it is appropriate that the laws by which Government calls its citizens to serve should be reviewed by distinguished citizens from different walks of life, not only in the light of military needs but also with a view to other national, community and individual needs:
Now, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1.Establishment of Commission.
(a) There is hereby established a commission to be known as the National Advisory Commission on Selective Service (hereinafter termed the Commission).
(b) The. Commission shall be composed of not more than twenty-five members who shall be designated by the President. The members shall be chosen with a view to their ability and experience, and shall be broadly representative of the various aspects of our national life. They shall serve at the pleasure of the President. The President shall designate one of the members of the Commission as Chairman.
SECTION 2.Functions of the Commission.
(a) The Commission shall consider the past, present and prospective functioning of selective service and other systems of national service in the light of the following factors:
(1) Fairness to all citizens;
(2) Military manpower requirements;
(3) The objective of minimizing uncertainty and interference with individual careers and education;
(4) Social, economic and employment conditions and goals;
(5) Budgetary and administrative considerations; and
(6) Any other factors that the Commission may deem relevant.
(b) Based on its study, the Commission shall make recommendations concerning such matters as:
(1) Methods of classification and selection of registrants;
(2) Qualifications for military service;
(3) Grounds for deferment and for exemption;
(4) Procedures for appeal and protection of individual rights; and
(5) Organization and administration of the selective service system at the national, state and local levels.
(c) The Commission is also authorized to evaluate other proposals related to selective service, including proposals for national service.
(d) The Commission shall make a final report to the President on or about January 1, 1967, setting forth its findings and recommendations, and including a statement concerning any proposed changes in applicable laws or in their administration.
SECTION 3.Compensation and Personnel.
(a) Each member of the Commission is authorized to receive such compensation as may be hereafter specified for each day spent in the work of the Commission pursuant to this order, together with travel expenses and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses when away from his usual place of residence, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 55a; 5 U.S.C. 73b-2) for persons employed intermittently.
(b) The Commission shall have an Executive Director, who shall be designated by the President and shall receive such compensation as may be hereafter specified.
The functions and duties of the Executive Director shall be prescribed by the Commission. The Commission is authorized to appoint and fix the compensation of such other personnel as may be necessary to enable it to carry out its functions. The Commission is authorized to obtain services in accordance with the provisions of section 15 of the Act of August 2, 1946 (5 U.S.C. 55a).
SECTION 4.Cooperation by Federal Departments and Agencies.
The Commission is authorized to request from any department, agency, or independent instrumentality of the Federal Government any information deemed necessary to carry out its functions, under this order; and each department, agency, and instrumentality is authorized, to the extent permitted by law and within the limits of available funds, to furnish such information to the Commission.
SECTION 5.Termination of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate ninety days after the submission, pursuant to section 2 of this order, of its final report to the President.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House
July 2, 1966
NOTE: Executive Order 11289 was not made public in the form of a White House press release.

APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS
On July 2, 1966, the appointment of the following members of the National Advisory Commission on Selective Service was announced at San Antonio, Tex., by the Office of the White House Press Secretary:
BURKE MARSHALL (Chairman of the Commission), vice president and general counsel, IBM, Armonk, N.Y.
KINGMAN BREWSTER, JR., president, Yale University
THOMAS S. GATES, JR., chairman of the board and chief executive officer, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, New York, N.Y.
OVETA CULP HOBBY, president and editor, Houston Post
ANNA ROSENBERG HOFFMAN, public and industrial relations consultant, New York, N.Y.
PAUL J. JENNINGS, president, International Union of Electrical, Radio, and Machine Workers, AFL—CIO, New York, N.Y.
JOHN A. McCONE, investment banker and corporate director, San Marino, Calif.
JAMES HENRY MCCROCKLIN, president, Southwest Texas State College, San Marcos, Tex.
REV. JOHN COURTNEY MURRAY, Jesuit Priest, professor and author, Woodstock, Md.
JEANNE L. NOBLE, associate professor, Center for Human Relations Studies, New York University
GEORGE E. REEDY, JR., vice president, Struthers-Wells Company, New York, N.Y.
DAVID MONROE SHOUP, director, U.S. Life Insurance Company, Arlington, Va.
FIORINDA R. SIMEONE, professor of surgery, Western Reserve University, Ohio
JAMES A. SUFFRIDGE, international president, Retail Clerks International Association, Washington, D.C.
FRANK STANLEY SZYMANSKI, Judge of the Probate Court in Detroit
LUTHER L. TERRY, vice president, University of Pennsylvania
WARREN G. WOODWARD, vice president of American Airlines, Los Angeles, Calif.
VERNON E. JORDAN, JR., project director, Voter Education Project, Southern Regional Council, Inc., Atlanta, Ga.
DANIEL M. LUEVANO, director, Western Region, Office of Economic Opportunity, Los Angeles, Calif.
JOHN H. JOHNSON, president, Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Ill. (Ebony, Hue, Jet) and trustee, Tuskegee Institute