Lyndon B. Johnson
July 16, 1968

Remarks to a Group of Members of the Future Farmers of America.
I THANK YOU very much for this nice, attractive little plaque which I will keep as a reminder of your visit here this morning.
At 8:30 I met with the congressional leadership of the Nation--the leadership of today. I am delighted that I could come from that meeting into this meeting--the leadership of tomorrow.
The subject of my meeting with the Speaker and the leaders of Congress was a matter that concerns the whole Nation--but concerns you young people perhaps more than anyone else.
Over the last few years, while you have been growing into manhood and womanhood, the Nation has been moving forward, too.
But we must not be looking to the past any more than you are. Our discussion this morning concerned legislation on behalf of all the people of America that look forward--that look to tomorrow.
Our eyes are on tomorrow. Even in ordinary times we have a clear call to action. But these are not ordinary times, as all of you young people must know.
We have many urgent problems that must be met and need to be met.
Of particular concern to you, we have a farm bill, that is now pending in the House and has been reported in the Senate, that will bring a measure of stability to the farmers of this Nation.
We have an increase in the food stamp bill that will not only be helpful to those who produce the food, but is essential to those who need the food.
We have a housing bill that affects millions of our citizens. It is the best and largest housing bill the Congress has ever considered. We hope we can act upon that soon.
We have a treaty to stop the spread of nuclear weapons in the world. Nothing could be more important to young people than stopping the spread of nuclear weapons.
We have a higher education act that exceeds and excels. We hope that the Congress can soon act on that.
We have the opportunity to save many a boy and girl from a career in crime by passing the Juvenile Delinquency Prevention and Control Act.
We have a great many measures for consumer protection. This is really the consumer Congress. Although we have passed a substantial number of bills in this regard, we still have the gas pipeline safety, the mutual fund reform, the wholesome fish and poultry, and hazardous radiation.
All of these things vitally affect each of you. Congress has an opportunity to enact, as it did yesterday, some very important conservation legislation including the redwoods, scenic rivers, and scenic trails.
We need to appropriate extra money for job training programs for the War on Poverty to help our young people prepare themselves for life and prepare themselves for skills that are needed and that they do not have.
We have a trade expansion act. We have an occupational safety and health act to protect our workers.
We should take action to guard our beaches and our coastlines against oil pollution.
We should turn our attention to the returning veterans and encourage them to help us in the slum classrooms, in the Teacher Corps, in the police ranks that are depleted, and in the firemen ranks.
We should enact a dangerous drug act which will stop the cruel traffic in LSD and marihuana.
This is just a part of the program for tomorrow that we have submitted in more than 20 messages to the Congress this year.
This Congress has already passed more than 50 major bills that affect you and your future--that improve the quality of life in America. And that is a good record. But it is just a foundation for things that need to be done.
As our leaders in Congress have said: We are going to have to roll up our sleeves and do the job and stay on it until we discharge our duties.

If Congress cannot complete its business within the next few weeks, then we hope it will return after the political conventions until we get most of these essential measures passed.
Our problems do not wait, and they are not bipartisan problems-- Democratic or Republican problems; they are American problems, problems for all of us. They affect all of our people, regardless of the labels we have or our own political philosophy.
So I am glad that you young leaders have a chance to come here and meet with the leaders of the Nation--meeting with the President as you are now, and at least have a report on the things that we are talking about; because there is not anything as important to your future or your life or your country as jobs, as housing, as education, as health, and as consumer messages.
In our democratic form of government, all of these things pass or fail by a majority sentiment. The Congress usually expresses the will of the majority of the people of this country.
That will is determined by the leadership that is provided to the people.
So many, many times since I have been here, I have wished that I had had an opportunity in my time as you young people have in your time, of picking up and leaving home and coming to the National Capital and seeing the President and the Congress, the Cabinet and others, and talking to them about the things that concern you.
We need to know what your needs are and how you think they should be met.
We need your leadership, your voice, and your vote and your interest. I have not the slightest concern that we will continue to provide leadership to the world as long as we have men and women from the farm, at your age, who have enough interest in government to come to the Capital and try to learn more about it.
I am happy that you could stop by here for a brief visit with me. I hope that you will watch these matters of great public interest.
Yesterday we passed a higher education bill in the Senate that will affect the education of each of you.
Yesterday we passed a vocational education bill in the House that will affect many of you.
As I say, very shortly we will take up your farm bill in the Senate. Very shortly we will take up the food stamp bill in the House.
So, all of these measures that we are working with every day tie in close to you. Your future depends on our present--what we do now.
You are welcome here. I thank you for the chance you have given me to review very briefly with you some of the things that concern your country and what we are trying to do about them.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 10:15 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. Representatives of the organization presented him with a plaque inscribed "To Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the United States, in appreciation for service to American youth, 1968."