Lyndon B. Johnson
July 23, 1964

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the Prime Minister of Malaysia.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States and the Prime Minister of Malaysia met on July 22 and 23 to discuss matters of mutual interest and recent developments in Southeast Asia.
President Johnson and Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman welcomed this, their first meeting, and the opportunity it presented to become personally acquainted and to review major problems in Southeast Asia. The President and the Prime Minister discussed the Communist threat to and activities in Laos and Vietnam and reaffirmed their support of the cause of freedom in those countries. The President noted with appreciation the contribution Malaysia has made to the common cause in Vietnam by providing equipment, training and advice based on her own experience in combating Communist terrorism. In turn the President made clear that all Southeast Asian countries, including Malaysia, could rely on the firm intent of the United States to resist Communist aggression against Free Asian nations.
The Prime Minister reviewed developments in Malaysia with the President and progress made thus far in furthering the economic and social progress of its people. The Prime Minister also expressed appreciation for the contribution of American Peace Corps Volunteers in this task.
The President informed the Prime Minister of his special interest in Malaysia's impressive achievements in the fields of education, economic growth and rural development. The President noted with admiration the Prime Minister's objective of a happy and prosperous nation upholding the principles of justice, freedom and democracy.
The Prime Minister outlined for the President the origins of the Malaysian concept and the history of its formation, and in this context reviewed the current activities by a neighboring state in violation of the territorial integrity of Malaysia.
The Prime Minister recounted his determined and various efforts to seek an amicable and honorable solution to the problem including the recent tripartite meeting in Tokyo. He also informed the President of the discussions at the recent Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference in London.
The President re-affirmed the support of the United States for a free and independent Malaysia, and for Malaysia's efforts to maintain her security, preserve her sovereignty and continue her development in peace and harmony.
The President agreed to provide military training in the United States for Malaysian personnel, and to consider promptly and sympathetically credit sales, under existing arrangements, of appropriate military equipment for the defense of Malaysia.
The President expressed his strong hope that a peaceful and honorable way out of the current and dangerous situation could be found, and his appreciation for the earnest endeavors of the Prime Minister to this end. The President and the Prime Minister agreed that, while firmness in self-defense is indispensable, it is better to talk than fight.
The President and the Prime Minister found in the common devotion of the United States and Malaysia to the principles of democratic government and individual freedom a bond of understanding which is certain to bring their two countries into a constantly closer relationship, and agreed to maintain close contact on problems of mutual interest.