Lyndon B. Johnson
July 26, 1965

Remarks at the Swearing In of Arthur J. Goldberg as U.S. Representative to the United Nations.
Ambassador and Mrs. Goldberg, Members of the Cabinet, Members of Congress, distinguished guests:
The Vice President and I are delighted to have you here in the Rose Garden on this happy morning. This is a very delightful affair for Arthur Goldberg and his family, and for me, and for our country, and for the cause of all mankind.
Only a few days ago the great voice of a great and good American was stilled by the passing of Adlai Stevenson. Today another distinguished American comes forward to follow in his place. It is a symbolic and appropriate reminder to us, and to the world, of the continuity in the continuing purposes of this great Nation.
The voice of America is never one voice. The vision of America is never one man's vision alone. The will of America for a just and for a decent and for a peaceful world is never the will of just one citizen. But the continuing and constant will of 190 million citizens is the will that will be expressed by the distinguished Ambassador as the voice of America at the United Nations.
It is this constant, this unchanging, this unending will and resolve of our people that we ask our representatives to convey to all the peoples of the world through the forums of the United Nations.
Ours is a dynamic land and a dynamic society. Arthur Goldberg's own story testifies to this most eloquently. A son of immigrants, born to the most humble beginnings, he has risen from newsboy on the streets of Chicago to success in his profession, to serve in the Cabinet, to honor on the Nation's highest court, and now to a position where he will be the advocate of this Nation's policies before the world.
This personal story is a testament to the vigor, and the vitality, and the forward movement of our open and our restless and our questioning society.
But there is another side of America, a side which I hope the world will never forget or never underestimate.
We are a nation dedicated and committed to ideals and values about the worth of man and about the preciousness of his liberty. In support of our dedication and commitment, we are resolute and we have built great strength to manifest that resolve. But we are above all a patient Nation and a patient people, and we have the strength, and we have the stability and the success to permit us to be patient.
For 20 years or more we have manifested our patience around the world. Our sons, today, keep a vigil of peace and freedom on lines where they have stood now for more than a generation. We do not expect the world to change or to be changed either in a month, or a year, or a decade. But we have the patience and the resolve to pursue our purposes, for however long it may be necessary to assure for mankind the blessings of a world that is without terror, or without injustice, or without want.
So, let none abroad--and let none here at home--ever doubt or ever question that America has the patience or the perseverance to do what the cause of mankind requires, and what our many commitments around the world necessitate.
I know of no more gifted citizen, no more able individual, to express, and to interpret, and to explain the policies of the United States Government, as determined by the people and the President and the Congress, than this most able and distinguished gentleman who will shortly take the oath of office-Arthur Goldberg.
This is a very proud moment personally, but it is also a very proud moment for all Americans.
I take particular pride in welcoming to this ceremony one of our most distinguished and most beloved Americans, the great humanitarian, the Justice of the Supreme Court, Hugo Black, who will now administer the oath of office.
Note: The swearing-in ceremony was held at 11:40 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. The text of Mr. Goldberg's remarks is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 1, p. 9).
See also Item 370.