Lyndon B. Johnson
July 07, 1964

Proclamation 3598—Monocacy Battle Centennial

WhereasJuly 9, 1964, marks the one hundredth anniversary of the Battle of the Monocacy of the Civil War; and
Whereasthe gallant stand of the Union troops in this battle near Frederick, Maryland, caused a sufficient delay in the Confederate march on Washington to permit adequate reinforcement of the city's defenses; and
Whereasthe Congress, by an act approved July 7, 1964, has requested the President to issue a proclamation designating July 9, 1964, as Monocacy Battle-Centennial:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby designate July 9, 1964, as Monocacy Battle Centennial. In commemoration of the anniversary of this battle and the men who lost their lives in the struggle for control of the Nation's Capital, I request appropriate officials of the Government to display the flag of the United States on all Government buildings in the District of Columbia on that day at half staff until noon and at full staff after noon. I also call upon the people of the District of Columbia to fly the flag in like manner on that date at their homes, churches, and other suitable places.
I urge those who can do so to attend the dedication ceremonies to be held on that date at the site of the battle. Let others, in their home communities, hold ceremonies honoring the brave men of both sides who fought there-men who represented no fewer than twelve States, from Vermont to Louisiana.
Let us honor them, men of North and South, as Americans.
And let us, with the same courage they displayed, seize the opportunity that our generation has to meet the challenges of our own day, always striving "to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice * * * and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity * * * "
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this seventh day of July in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-four, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-ninth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
GEORGE W. BALL,

Acting Secretary of State.