Lyndon B. Johnson
July 21, 1964

Proclamation 3601—American Education Week, 1964

Whereaseducation is the keystone to human advancement because it promotes understanding among all men of good will, makes possible scientific, industrial, and agricultural achievements that exceed our fondest dreams, and gives promise of an ever better world tomorrow; and
Whereaseducation is basic to every facet of our individual lives and of the life of our Nation; and
Whereasour long-standing and determined support of education has rewarded our people with a fulfillment and prosperity unparalleled in the history of mankind; and
Whereasour educational framework must be responsive not only to the needs of individuals as they seek to solve the problems of today but must also anticipate the challenges of tomorrow; and
Whereasour goal for these momentous times must be the creation with utmost haste of a great society -a Nation without poverty or rancor and a world without fear; and
Whereaseducation is the single most effective instrument by which we can make that goal a reality:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the period from November 8 through November 14, 1964, as American Education Week.
I urge all Americans to take time during that week to consider the needs and the accomplishments of our schools and colleges and to acquaint themselves more fully with the activities and objectives of those institutions. I ask all our people to dedicate themselves to renewed and continuous efforts to improve the quality of education. We must avoid complacency and we must never be quite satisfied with our educational institutions, no matter how good they may be, and, instead, we must constantly strive to assure that each of our people has the opportunity to obtain the best education possible-for upon the accomplishment of that task depends the realization of our hopes and aspirations for a bright future for our Nation and for our children.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this 21st day of July in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-four, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-ninth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
DEAN RUSK,

Secretary of State.