Lyndon B. Johnson
July 22, 1965

Remarks to the British Ambassador at the Magna Carta Anniversary Ceremony.
Sir Patrick :
I am most grateful to you. On behalf of the American people, I thank your Government and your countrymen for this most gracious and this very deeply appreciated act of yours this morning.
The Magna Carta has always meant much to all Americans.
The success of the lords who, shall we say, reasoned together with King John 750 years ago inspired the Americans who tried the same on King George III 189 years ago from Philadelphia. The outcome was good or bad--depending on the point of view, I think.
But more than that, the principles that are set forth in this Great Charter have inspired and guided all of us throughout our existence--and they do that today. All we do at home and all we do throughout the world, is meant to assure men the right to "freedom under law" and the right to expect impartial justice.
We never forget those great words of this Charter: To no one will we sell, to none will we deny or delay, right or justice.
Britain's sons, like America's sons, stand their guard today in many distant lands so that these promises may be fulfilled for all mankind, and that we may ultimately obtain our objective of a world that can live in peace together.
American families, like your families, Sir Patrick, devoutly want peace. We are extremely grateful in this country to your leaders, to your very able Prime Minister, for the courageous and their very willing initiatives and efforts that they have made seeking the peace. But we also know that you want, as we want, peace with honor, and peace with freedom, and peace with dignity.
So we are proud to stand with you this morning, and to work with you, and to strive with you as friends and allies for a better world and for a peaceful world.
And while you are here, Sir Patrick, may I say this. I ask you to convey to your countrymen the appreciation of all the Americans for the very many thoughtful courtesies extended last week when death came in London to our beloved statesman, Adlai Stevenson. By birth and loyalty Ambassador Stevenson was an American, but in spirit he was at home really in both of our lands. And when death came to him in the midst of your people, your gracious understanding touched all Americans, and I should like for you to say to them, on behalf of the people of the United States, we are so grateful that in this hour of trouble for us you were so understanding.
Note: The President spoke at 11 :40 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Sir Patrick Dean, British Ambassador to the United States. Preceding the President's remarks, Sir Patrick presented him with a copy of "Magna Carta" by James Clarke Holt (Cambridge University Press, 1965).