Lyndon B. Johnson
July 30, 1964

Statement by the President on Receiving a Progress Report of the Council on Physical Fitness.
THE FITNESS of our Nation for the tasks of our times can never be greater than the general physical fitness of our citizens. A people proud of their collective heritage will take pride in their individual health, because we cannot stay strong as a country if we go soft as citizens.
In the past few years there has been a wholesome and welcome reawakening of pride and self-respect among us about our individual fitness. Our greater leisure is not leading to a greater lethargy--and this is reassuring. A nation cannot be both a leader and lazy.
The progress report of the President's Council on Physical Fitness shows impressively that America's abundance is not encouraging apathy and our self-sufficiency is not breeding self-indulgence.
Since the Council's program began 3 years ago under the inspiration of President Kennedy, there has been remarkable response and imposing progress toward instilling in our youth the good habits of physical fitness.
--Nine million more pupils in grades 4-12 took part in school physical activity programs in the last school year than in 1961-62.
--Eight out of 10 of our 31 million school children in the primary and secondary grades participated in physical activity programs during the 1963-64 school year.
--Three years ago less than half (47 percent) of our high school juniors and seniors participated in school physical activity programs. In 1963-64 the level of participation reached 84 percent.
--Since the beginning of the Council's efforts, 68 percent of the Nation's schools have strengthened their physical activity programs. Seventeen States have raised their physical education requirements. Twelve States have improved the criteria for accrediting health and physical education.
--Interest in personal and home exercise programs is rising. Since publication on August 22, 1963, more than 385,000 copies of the Council's home exercise plan have been purchased, and orders average 5,000 per week at present.
These are solid and substantial gains. The cooperation of the States and local school districts is most encouraging and reflects the growing awareness of this key responsibility.
We have more to do. One out of seven school children do not participate in any physical activity program. Another 27 percent take part only once or twice a week. I believe that interested and responsible parents should and will work with their local schools to strengthen physical activity programs.
In all our communities we ought to come to grips with the challenge of increasing the use and availability of the recreation facilities of our schools--for more hours each day, more days each year, for more members of the families in the neighborhood.
Our Nation pays a tangible and measurable price each year for neglect of the fitness of our people, young and old. I would hope that in the year ahead at least one of our civic organizations in each city and community will dedicate its effort to constructive leadership for fitness. Our minimum goal should certainly be 100 percent participation by our school children in physical activity programs during the 1964-65 school year.
In his new role Stan Musial is starring once again and the country can be grateful for the leadership he is offering.
Note: The statement is part of a White House release making public a progress report of the President's Council on Physical Fitness dated July 10, 1964 (11 pp. processed).
In closing his remarks the President referred to Stan Musial, Consultant to the President on Physical Fitness.