Lyndon B. Johnson
July 03, 1968

Remarks Upon Arrival in San Antonio With a Group of Foreign Ambassadors.
Governor Connally, Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:
It is a delight to come back to San Antonio and to see so many friendly and familiar faces. I am sure that my friends, the distinguished ambassadors who came here from Washington with us today, will long remember this Texas-style welcome.
I am pleased that these distinguished guests from our neighboring nations have been able to travel down here to visit with us and to take advantage of our invitation to see the Hemis-Fair and to spend an old-fashioned Fourth of July with us in Texas.
Their presence symbolizes a confluence of civilizations--the gathering together of talents and dreams from many nations. That, of course, is the theme of the Hemis-Fair--but not of Hemis-Fair alone. It is the living and the eternal theme of the United States of America--a Nation that has been made great by an infusion and mingling of all the cultures of the world.
Thirty-four years ago, I came here as the sun was setting late one evening and I was married to a lovely lady in this city in St. Mark's Church, in downtown San Antonio. We are going back there tomorrow to see what has happened since we were there.
In addition, she and I are going to enjoy Hemis-Fair. I don't know how many times she has visited it. She travels more than almost anyone I know. But it is the first time I have had a chance to go.
Tonight, we will join the ambassadors at the dinner that the Governor has been so thoughtful to arrange at his ranch.
So now, Governor, as I go to the hills and you go to the South, I am going to turn over these distinguished guests to your care. I know something of your exciting plans for them. I know something of the hospitality that you as the Governor of this great State can extend. I know something of the graciousness that the people of this city always show to all of those who come here to visit with them.
I want to thank those who have been responsible for Hemis-Fair, particularly the Mayor, Mr. Sinkin, Mr. Zachry, and Ambassador Clark. I want to tell all of you that I am looking forward to being with you tomorrow.

Thank you for coming out here.
Note: The President spoke at 2:50 p.m. at Randolph Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas. In his opening words he referred to John B. Connally, Governor of Texas. During his remarks he referred to Walter W. McAllister, Mayor of San Antonio, William Sinkin, Chairman of the Hemis-Fair Committee for Federal Participation, H. B. Zachry, Chairman of the Board of Hemis-Fair, and Edward Clark, United States Commissioner for Hemis-Fair and former U.S. Ambassador to Australia.
The President was accompanied on his flight from Washington by some 40 foreign ambassadors, mostly from Latin American nations, who had been invited to visit Hemis-Fair '68 in San Antonio.