Lyndon B. Johnson
July 29, 1965

Remarks Upon Viewing New Mariner 4 Pictures From Mars.
Dr. Webb, Dr. Pickering, Dr. Leighton, Members of Congress, distinguished guests:
Unaccustomed as I am to welcoming men from Mars, I am very happy to see you gentlemen here this morning. As a member of the generation that Orson Welles scared out of its wits, I must confess that I am a little bit relieved that your photographs didn't show more signs of life out there.
I think I speak for every American when I tell you how very proud and how impressed, how grateful we are for what you and all the many members of your team have accomplished on the Mariner 4 mission.
The flight of Mariner 4 will long stand as one of the really great advances in man's unending quest to extend the horizons of human knowledge. In the history books of tomorrow, unlike the headlines of today, the project's name may be lost but the names of the men of vision, men of imagination and faith who made this enterprise such a historic success are going to be honored in the world for many generations to come.
This advance for mankind is awe-inspiring. It is all the more so when we realize that such capabilities have come into being within a short span of a very few years. As Director Webb observed a few moments ago, it was only 7 years ago that some could, and some did, say that none of this would ever be possible. In fact, some said a good deal more along that line, which I really don't want to repeat this morning because much of what they said was aimed directly at me.
What I believed in 1957 and 1958, when I was striving and searching and seeking to get our space program moving with hearings that almost went around the clock--what I believed then I believe even more strongly now because of what you have done.
Our Nation must live by its vision, must live by its faith, or we won't live at all. And where there is no vision the people perish.
For 189 years generations of Americans have had a vision and a faith that the world could somehow, someday live in peace. From 1776 to 1965 mankind has journeyed far 'toward the reality of that dream. And I am determined, and I believe the American people and their spokesmen in the great Congress are determined, that men and nations shall hold steady to that course toward the sun of sanity, and toward enlightenment and reason instead of war.
Mankind's progress toward the distant stars of peace and reason must not, and shall not, be either delayed or diverted by those who would cast the shadow of fear across its path and have it fall in the darkness of war.
This is the real purpose of all that we do on the earth around us and in the reaches of space beyond us. We are striving to shelter and to save the gains that man has made while, at the same time, we are seeking to help man fulfill the promise within him, to fulfill that promise in peace and in freedom.
I remain an optimist always about man and about man's future, and I have never been more optimistic than now. I believe it is very clear that in this day, when we are reaching out among the stars, the earth's billions will not set their compass by dogmas and doctrines which reject peace, and embrace force, and rely upon aggression and terror for fulfillment.
It may be--it may just be that life as we know it with its humanity is more unique than many have thought, and we must remember this.
In the works of space, as in the works of peace, this great Nation of ours stands always ready to join with any others--to join with all others--and we are ready as I speak now
So, today, it is my great pleasure to honor these outstanding Americans on behalf of all of their countrymen. They have brought the Mariner 4 from idea to reality and have kept the vigil with it now through 2:28 days of flight. So, this morning we all are very proud to salute them and to pay honor to their lasting contribution to the knowledge of all mankind, and to the men and women, the executives and the clerks, to the Congress-the House and the Senate--to the great industrialists and the forces of American labor, all of whom put their shoulder to the wheel and united to make it possible for these adventures and advances.
In the terms of the Navy, for which we all have such great respect, I say, "Well done."
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 10:45 a.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Dr. James E. Webb, Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., and Dr. Robert B. Leighton, chief experimenter of the picture team at the laboratory. During his remarks the President referred to Orson Welles, actor, writer, and producer.
Following his remarks the President presented three National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards as follows: the Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Pickering, the Outstanding Leadership Award to Oran Nicks, Director of the Lunar and Planetary Programs at NASA headquarters, and the Outstanding Scientific Achievement Award to Jack N. James, Acting Assistant Laboratory Director for Lunar and Planetary Projects at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and former Mariner Project Manager.
The Mariner 4 spacecraft began its historic journey to the planet Mars on November 28, 1964. On July 15, 1965, it sent the first pictures back to the let Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena.