Lyndon B. Johnson
July 13, 1967

Remarks Upon Presenting the Distinguished Service Medal to Adm. David L. McDonald.
Admiral McDonald and family; General Westmoreland, we are delighted you could be present on this occasion; Members of the Cabinet; Members of the Congress; Secretary Nitze; members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; ladies and gentlemen:
We have come here today to honor America's Chief of Naval Operations. He is a great sailor who has given 43 years of service to the Nation that he loves.
He has earned our country's highest military award for service "other than combat." This afternoon I want to recognize our Navy's "service other than combat"--which is a rather clumsy phrase, but one that encompasses an enormous contribution to this Nation's general welfare.
War is not the only business of the United States Navy. Peace--and the guarding of peace--is a constant and a primary duty of all who serve beneath our flag.
The American Navy is an awesome force. A succession of fine commanders like Admiral McDonald have fashioned and maintained it as a superb weapon in times of war. But our Navy is also a very subtle instrument for peace.
The peacemaking efforts of our Navy make few headlines, even in a place as closely watched as Vietnam. Too few people remember that one of the Navy's earliest missions in Vietnam was in the troubled summer of 1954.
The country had been divided along the 17th parallel, into North and South. It was the last time that the people of North Vietnam had a free choice between communism and democracy.
Hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese elected freedom. They voted for liberty with their feet. With the few possessions they could carry, they gathered in the now famous harbor of Haiphong. From there the American Navy gave them their historic passage to freedom, carrying them, their families, and their meager goods south, away from Communist rule.
American transports, American landing craft, and other American ships moved 290,000 refugees to freedom. And it was one of the most remarkable humanitarian operations in history.
How many people remember that? How many remember the journey of these 290,000--or the other 600,000 who made their own way south--when they ask if the Vietnamese really desire to be free?
Today in South Vietnam, the men of the Navy still work for peace, in "service other than combat." In remote hamlets, teams of Seabees are building a free nation as part of the pacification effort.
Throughout South Vietnam, more than 2,000 Navy doctors, dentists, and corpsmen help the Marine units in this vital "other war." They work convinced that here, among the people, the elusive prize of peace will someday be found.
So today we dream of that peace even as we engage in war. We are proud to honor this great commander of a proud service, a brave legion of Americans who have gone to sea.
The distinguished Secretary of the Navy-Mr. Nitze--will read the citation for this award that a grateful Nation bestows upon its great sailor.
[Text of the citation read by Secretary Nitze]
The President of the United States takes pleasure in presenting a Gold Star in lieu of the Second Distinguished Service Medal to
ADMIRAL DAVID L. MCDONALD
UNITED STATES NAVY
for service as set forth in the following

CITATION:
For exceptionally meritorious service to the Government of the United States in a duty of great responsibility as the Chief of Naval Operations from 1 August 1963 to 1 August 1967. Throughout four years of unprecedented military demands in a peacetime environment, Admiral McDonald's superb leadership, judgment and professional skill have guided the operating forces of the Navy to ever-increasing standards of operational readiness and combat effectiveness. In periods of extreme tension, and of combat itself, naval forces have repeatedly proven ready and responsive in support of United States interests beyond our shores. Under Admiral McDonald's executive direction, these forces have responded so superbly, and new capabilities and concepts have been fostered so effectively, as to markedly increase not only the readiness of the Navy itself, but also the national appreciation and respect for naval forces as a vital, responsive factor in the protection of the United States and its citizens, and in the defense of the free world. By his professional leadership and devotion to duty as the Chief of Naval Operations during this most difficult and challenging period, Admiral McDonald has rendered exceptionally valuable and distinguished service and has contributed greatly to the success of the United States and friendly forces engaged in combat, and to the protection of citizens of free nations around the world, thereby upholding and contributing to the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The President spoke at 1:06 p.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, Gen. William C. Westmoreland, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, and Paul H. Nitze, Secretary of the Navy.