Lyndon B. Johnson
June 02, 1964

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the Prime Minister of Israel.
PRIME MINISTER Eshkol and President Johnson have completed two days of discussions on matters of mutual interest and concern. Both welcomed the opportunity presented by the Prime Minister's visit at the invitation of the President for a full exchange of views.
The President presented the views of the United States on various world problems, including those of the Near East. He emphasized the strong desire of the United States for friendly relations with all nations of the Near East, and its devotion to peace in the area and to peaceful economic and social development of all countries in the area. He congratulated Prime Minister Eshkol on the progress made by Israel since 1948 in the economic, technical, social and cultural fields. He noted the example provided by Israel in economic growth and human development in conditions of freedom.
Prime Minister Eshkol expressed deep appreciation for the consistent interest and sympathy shown by the United States and for the generous economic assistance rendered by the U.S. Government and the American people to Israel over the years. He was confident that Israel's development would continue unabated towards the rapid achievement of a self-sustaining economy. It was his deep conviction that peace and the maintenance of the territorial integrity and national independence of all countries in the Near East is of vital interest to the region and to the world.
The President welcomed assurances of Israel's deep concern, which the United States shares, for peace in the area. He reiterated to Prime Minister Eshkol U.S. support for the territorial integrity and political independence of all countries in the Near East and emphasized the firm opposition of the United States to aggression and the use of force or the threat of force against any country. In this connection, both leaders expressed their concern at the diversion of vitally important resources from development to armaments.
The two leaders declared their firm determination to make every effort to increase the broad area of understanding which already exists between Israel and the United States and agreed that the Prime Minister's visit advanced this objective.
The agreement reached to undertake joint studies on problems of desalting provided concrete evidence of the desire of the United States to continue to assist Israel in its efforts to solve remaining economic problems. Both countries view this as part of the world-wide cooperative effort being undertaken to solve the problem of scarcity of water and hope for rapid progress toward large-scale desalting in Israel. The knowledge and experience obtained from the joint effort will be available to all countries with water deficiencies.
In conclusion, the President and Prime Minister expressed their conviction that their peoples shared common values and were dedicated to the advancement of man, to individual freedom, and to human dignity.