Lyndon B. Johnson
June 28, 1966

Remarks to the Press Following a Meeting To Review Plans for the Inauguration of Medicare.
Ladies and gentlemen:
We had a review--one of a series of reviews--with the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Surgeon General, and others concerning the inauguration of the Medicare program to be effective July 1.
They have reported to me the progress that has been made. It has been substantial progress in getting hospitals that are eligible within compliance.
We reviewed it State by State. We tried to anticipate some of the problems that will come into being when the act takes effect.
The Secretary will discuss with you the general outline of our meeting this morning. The Secretary will also take any questions that you may have specifically on the subject of our meeting or upon Medicare, or upon individual problems or individual States.
I think things are moving along very well in these last few days. All the States are not in 100 percent, but substantial progress has been made and is being made.
Secretary Gardner, Secretary Cohen, and the Surgeon General have made a rather good report. I hope we use every hour that is left to make available to our aged people all the facilities that are in existence.
I observe that there are a few States that still have problems. The Surgeon General, the Social Security offices, and others are working very closely with them.
We hope that every hospital, every doctor, and every eligible older citizen will be understanding and cooperative, to try to work together in this worthwhile objective that we are undertaking for the first time in this country.
I want to commend Secretary Gardner, Mr. Cohen, and the Surgeon General for what they have done. I will be receiving further reports from them from time to time.
Note: The President spoke at 12:32 p.m. in the Fish Room at the White House. Following his remarks a press briefing was held in which the following officials participated: John W. Gardner, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, Dr. William H. Stewart, Surgeon General, Public Health Service, Wilbur J. Cohen, Under Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, and S. Douglass Cater, Jr., Special Assistant to the President. The complete text of the briefing is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 2, p. 843).