Lyndon B. Johnson
June 24, 1966

Remarks at the Presentation of the Young American Medals.
Mr. Attorney General Director Hoover, distinguished medal winners, my friends from the Senate and the House, ladies and gentlemen:
We have come here this morning to honor three young men who are tender in years but mature in action, who by their devotion, their intelligence, and their courage have demonstrated what is best about the coming generation of young Americans.
Jon Hanshus is honored for his meaningful contributions to other young people. While others worried about the employment problems of the young, Ion Hanshus was translating his concern into an effective program of service.
David Crowe and Jeffrey Gallagher served in another way--by sudden and heroic actions, in utter disregard for their own safety.
Each of these three young men has, in Shakespeare's words, "borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a lamb, the feats of a lion."
In times such as these, to talk of bravery often means to talk also of sorrow.
But today, though tragedy or near tragedy underlie two of these awards, we honor courage and service with both pride and pleasure.
Our honorees were chosen from 59 nominations, a record number, from all parts of our Nation.
Among these other nominations was that of Everett D. Boston of Grafton, West Virginia, who dived into an icy river to rescue two youths from a submerged automobile. Now 19, Everett Boston serves anew, as a soldier fighting for his country in Vietnam.
In San Diego, California, 14-year-old Linda Lowe twice entered the burning home of a neighbor to bring two children to safety.
In Oxford, Alabama, another 14-year-old, James William Bennett, used the first-aid training that he had received as a Boy Scout to administer artificial respiration and thus save the life of a youth who had been kicked by a horse.
In Dearborn, Michigan, Heather Lynn Clark, 17, nearly blind since birth, has rendered impressive service as a volunteer worker at a veterans hospital and in working with handicapped children.
So it is with a great deal of pride and real pleasure to me that I welcome you here today not only so that we can pay honor to you, but through you to honor the other nominees and the thousands of young Americans who daily perform acts of valor and service for their communities and for their country.
So to them and to you I offer the congratulations, the admiration, and the gratitude of all the American people. You are welcome here. We are honored that you have come.
Note: The President spoke at 11:15 a.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Attorney General Nicholas deB. Katzenbach and J. Edgar Hoover, Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The President presented the gold Young American Medals to the following: David Eugene Crowe, aged 7, of Cherokee, Kans., who at the age of 5 and blind in one eye single-handedly rescued his three younger sisters from their burning home; Jeffrey James Gallagher, aged 17, of Haskell, N.J., who waded through a wall of fire and led two men out of the burning wreckage of their airplane; and Jon Arthur Hanshus, aged 19, of Eau Claire, Wis., who organized a youth employment service for the young people of that city and found more than 700 previously nonexistent jobs for them.
Winners were selected by the Young American Medals Committee, composed of Mr. Hoover, Solicitor General Thurgood Marshall, and Jacob Rosenthal, Director of Public Information, Department of Justice.