Lyndon B. Johnson
June 01, 1965

Special Message to the Congress on the Need for Additional Foreign Aid Funds for Southeast Asia.
To the Congress of the United States:
The American people want their government to be not only strong but compassionate. They know that a society is secure only where social justice is secure for all its citizens. When there is turmoil anywhere in our own country, our instinct is to inquire if there is injustice. That instinct is sound. And these principles of compassion and justice do not stop at the water's edge. We do not have one policy for our own people and another for our friends abroad.
A vast revolution is sweeping the southern half of this globe. We do not intend that the Communists shall become the beneficiaries of this revolt against injustice and privation. We intend to lead vigorously in that struggle. We will continue to back that intention with practical and concrete help.
In Southeast Asia today, we are offering our hand and our abundance to those who seek to build a brighter future. The effort to create more progressive societies cannot wait for an ideal moment. It cannot wait until peace has been finally secured. We must move ahead now.
I know of no more urgent task ahead. It requires more of us, more of other prosperous nations, and more of the people of Southeast Asia.
For our part, I propose that we expand our own economic assistance to the people of South Viet-Nam, Thailand and Laos.
I propose we start now to make available our share of the money needed to harness the resources of the entire Southeast Asia region for the benefit of all its people. This must be an international venture. That is why I have asked Mr. Eugene Black to consult with the United Nations Secretary General and the leaders of the poor and advanced nations. Our role will be vital, but we hope that all other industrialized nations, including the Soviet Union, will participate.
To support our own effort, I ask the Congress to authorize and appropriate for FY 1966 an additional $89 million for the Agency for International Development for expanded programs of economic and social development in Southeast Asia.
This money will serve many purposes:
1. Approximately $19 million will provide the first installment of our contribution to the accelerated development of the Mekong River Basin. This is an important part of the general program of regional development which I outlined at Johns Hopkins University on April 7. This money will enable us to meet a request for half the cost of building the Nam Ngum Dam, which the international Mekong Committee has marked "top priority" if the Mekong River is to be put to work for the people of the region. This will be the first Mekong power project to serve two countries, promising power to small industry and lights for thousands of homes in Northeast Thailand and Laos. The funds will provide also for
--power lines across the Mekong linking Laos and Thailand;
--extensive studies of further hydroelectric, irrigation and flood control projects on the Mekong main stream and its tributaries;
--expansion of distribution lines in Laos.
2. Five million dollars will be used to support electrification cooperatives near three 'provincial towns--Long Xuyen, Dalat and Nha Thang--in South Vietnam. Co-ops, which have been so important to the lives of our rural people, will bring the benefits of low priced electricity to more than 200,000 Vietnamese. We hope this pattern can be duplicated in towns and villages throughout the region. I will ask that we provide further support if the pattern meets the success we believe possible.
3. Seven million dollars will help provide improved medical and surgical services, especially in the more remote areas of Vietnam, Laos and Thailand. South Vietnam is tragically short of doctors; some 200 civilian physicians must care for a population of 15,000,000. In Laos the system of AID-supported village clinics and rural hospitals now reaches more than a million people. But that is not enough. We propose to extend the program in Laos, assist the Thailand Government to expand its public health services to thousands of rural villages, and to organize additional medical and surgical teams for sick and injured civilians in South Vietnam.
Better health is the first fruit of modern science. For the people of these countries it has far too long been an empty promise. I hope that when peace comes our medical assistance can be expanded and made available to the sick and wounded of the area without regard to political commitment.
4. Approximately $6 million will be used to train people for the construction of roads, dams and other small-scale village 'projects in Thailand and Laos. In many parts of Asia the chance of the villager for markets, education and access to public services depends on his getting a road. A nearby water well dramatically lightens the burdens of the farmer's wife. With these tools and skills local people can build their own schools and clinics--blessings only dreamed of before.
5. Approximately $45 million will be used to finance increasing imports of iron and steel, cement, chemicals and pesticides, drugs, trucks and other essential goods necessary for a growing civilian economy. This money will allow factories not only to continue but, through investment, to expand production of both capital and consumer goods. It will provide materials for urgently needed low-cost housing. And it will maintain production incentives and avoid inflation. It is not easy for a small country, with a low income, to fight a war on its own soil and at the same time persist in the business of nation-building. The additional import support which I propose will help Vietnam to persevere in this difficult task.
6. An additional $7 million will supplement the present program of agricultural development and support additional government services in all three countries, and will help in the planning of further industrial expansion in the secure areas of Vietnam.
Much of the additional assistance I request is for Vietnam. This is not a poor and unfavored land. There is water and rich soil and ample natural resources. The people are patient, hard-working, the custodians of a proud and ancient civilization. They have been oppressed not by nature but by man. The failures of man can be redeemed. That is the purpose of the aid for which I now ask additional authorization.
We are defending the right of the people of South Vietnam to decide their own destiny. Where this right is attacked by force, we have no alternative but to reply with strength. But military action is not a final solution in this area; it is only a partial means to a much larger goal. Freedom and progress will be possible in Vietnam only as the people are assured that history is on their side--that it will give them a chance to make a living in peace, to educate their children, to escape the ravages of disease and, above all, to be free of the oppressors who for so long have fed on their labors.
Our effort on behalf of the people of Southeast Asia should unite, not divide, the people of that region. Our policy is not to spread conflict but to heal conflict.
I ask the Congress, as part of our continuing affirmation of America's faith in the cause of man, to respond promptly and fully to this request.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House

June 1, 1965
Note: The Foreign Assistance Act of 1965, which appropriated an additional $89 million for use in Southeast Asia, was approved by the President on September 6, 1965 (see Item 495).
In his message the President referred to Eugene R. Black, adviser to the President on Southeast Asian social and economic development and former President of the World Bank, and to U Thant, Secretary General of the United Nations.