Lyndon B. Johnson
June 24, 1968

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report of the Railroad Retirement Board.
To the Congress of the United States:
It is with special satisfaction that I transmit the Annual Report of the Railroad Retirement Board for fiscal year 1967.
During the year, more than one million individuals received $1.3 billion in retirement and survivor benefits, an increase of $65 million over the preceding year.
In the same period, unemployment and sickness benefits were only $71 million. This represented the lowest total paid under the railroad unemployment and sickness insurance system in 15 years, with the decrease reflecting in large part the continued high level of economic activity in the Nation.
Even greater protection for railroad beneficiaries will soon be available, thanks to the recent legislation enacted by the Congress. These amendments to the basic laws administered by the Railroad Retirement Board were jointly recommended by railroad management and railroad labor. They are to be commended for their continued cooperation in improving these laws.

As a result of these amendments, every one of the million retirement and survivor beneficiaries will receive added benefits. In addition, the benefit rates under the unemployment-sickness system will rise by almost 25 percent, and protection will be extended to those with prolonged illnesses.
The latest amendments continue the record of steady improvement in our system of protection for railroad workers and their families against the economic hazards accompanying old age, unemployment, illness and death.
This report shows the fruits of our common and continued efforts to lift the elderly citizens of our country out of the ranks of poverty, and thereby to give more meaning to their years of retirement.

I commend the report to your attention.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

June 24, 1968
Note: The report is entitled "Railroad Retirement Board: 1967 Annual Report for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30" (Government Printing Office, 186 pp.).