Lyndon B. Johnson
June 20, 1968

Presidential Unit Citation Awarded the 1st Platoon, Company B, 1st Battalion, 69th Armor, USA.
BY VIRTUE of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States I have today awarded
THE PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION (ARMY) FOR EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM
TO 1ST PLATOON, COMPANY B, 1ST BATTALION,
69TH ARMOR UNITED STATES ARMY
The 1st Platoon distinguished itself by extraordinary heroism and outstanding professionalism while serving under the operational control of the 9th Company, 1st Cavalry Regiment, Republic of Korea Army during the defense of Landing Zone Twenty Seven Victor, Pleiku Province, Republic of Vietnam during the night of 9-10 August 1966. About one hour before midnight the sounds of digging outside the defensive perimeter were reported to one of the tank commanders by a Korean officer. The tank commander illuminated the suspicious area with the tank searchlight and reconnoitered it with machine gun fire. This action triggered the first of a series of violent attacks made against the position by a North Vietnamese Army battalion and reinforced by heavy fire from recoilless rifles, mortars, and rockets. During the next six hours, the foe made repeated assaults froth different directions, only to be beaten back by the coordinated fire of the stalwart defenders. Battlefield illumination was augmented by the two available tank searchlights until the latter were destroyed by enemy fire. Despite one fourth of its members being wounded, the 1st Platoon greatly assisted the 9th Company in holding the position under the intense ground attacks. The tenacious defense and subsequent mop-up of the battlefield virtually eliminated the enemy battalion as an effective fighting unit. The heavy losses inflicted upon the numerically superior enemy force attest to the physical courage, determination, and skill of the defenders. The close coordination and mutual cooperation between the Republic of Korea and the United States forces resulted in a fighting team undaunted by the enemy onslaught. This action of the 1st Platoon, Company B, 1st Battalion, 69th Armor is in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Army.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON