Lyndon B. Johnson
June 27, 1966

Statement by the President on the Government's "Mission SAFETY-70" Program.
I AM PLEASED to learn from Secretary of Labor Wirtz that more than 50 departments and agencies have inaugurated programs in the past year to meet the objective of Mission SAFETY-70. That objective is to reduce Federal employee injuries and costs 30 percent by 1970.
I have never believed that the Government can afford the attitude that, "Accidents will happen." Our philosophy must be, "Accidents should not happen."
We have now begun to put that philosophy into effect. Secretary Wirtz' report SHOWS:

--A 4.3 percent decline in the overall Federal injury frequency rate.

--A reduction from 2 to 26 percent in the injury rates among the 14 largest agencies, employing over three-fourths of the 2½ million Federal workers.

--One thousand fewer disabling injuries to Federal employees during the first year of the program.
We are pleased with these results. But we must press on to meet our long-range goals. Accidents still cost the Government about $200 million each year, plus untold human suffering. Agency heads must now translate their declarations of intent--and their written programs--into tangible results.
The major cause of death in the Federal service is motor vehicle accidents. Government vehicles cover nearly 2 3/4 billion miles annually. We must look more carefully at both the drivers and the vehicles they operate. Our drivers must be carefully selected, thoroughly tested, and properly trained. Our vehicles must comply with the highest safety standards and must be maintained in top condition.
But auto and other accidents away from work cause just as much suffering and just as much production loss as those accidents which occur on-the-job. Off-the-job safety programs are becoming increasingly important, and I expect administrators to encourage their employees to live safely as well as work safely.
Finally, I expect to see the establishment and improvement of internal operating procedures to provide uniform accident data for Government-wide summary and analysis.
The Federal Government has rightly taken the lead in national accident prevention programs--particularly those which occur on our highways. We intend to do everything we can to help the States reduce this wholesale slaughter of American citizens.
In the process, however, we must be certain that our own house is in order. That is the meaning--and the challenge--of Mission SAFETY-70.
Note: Secretary Wirtz' report, dated June 1966, is entitled "Mission SAFETY-70--One Year of Progress, Report to the President by the Secretary of Labor" (6 pp., processed).