Lyndon B. Johnson
June 27, 1967

Memorandum on the Fundraising Campaign in Federal Agencies in the Washington Metropolitan Area
Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies
I am pleased to announce that the Honorable Lee C. White, Chairman of the Federal Power Commission will serve as Chairman of this year's Combined Federal Campaign for the Washington Metropolitan Area. This is an important job and I am glad that Chairman White has agreed to undertake it.
The campaign this year, as for the past three years, combines into one single drive the campaigns of the United Givers Fund, the National Health Agencies, and the International Service Agencies. In this one drive Federal employees in the Washington Metropolitan Area will have an opportunity to share in meeting the needs of over 150 local, national and international health, welfare and social service agencies.
The success of the past Combined Federal Campaigns shows that Federal employees and military personnel like a once-a-year on-the-job campaign. A combined drive is convenient for employees and makes it possible for them to give their contribution through payroll deductions. Also, it is more economical for the Government since it cuts down on the number of campaigns.
The need of the voluntary organizations supported by the Combined Federal Campaign is greater than ever. These organizations perform essential services in helping the disadvantaged, in serving youth and the aged, in healing the sick, and in helping those in need overseas. I hope Federal employees will be generous in their support. The Washington area community in which each one of us lives and works is a better place because of the efforts of the voluntary organizations we support in this drive.
I request that you serve personally as Chairman of the combined campaign in your organization and appoint a top assistant as your Vice Chairman. Chairman White should be advised promptly of the person you designate as your Vice Chairman.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON