Lyndon B. Johnson
June 20, 1965

Statement by the President on Announcing the First International Symposium on Water Desalination.
A SHORTAGE of fresh water is one of the most critical problems facing the nations of the world. Developing nations which face rapid population growth must establish adequate fresh water supplies if they are to achieve their potential. The world's seas and oceans offer an inexhaustible supply of fresh water--if economically feasible methods of desalting can be developed.
The United States has been deeply involved in recent years in desalination research, sharing the results of this research with other nations:
--A study is underway, supported jointly by the United States and Israel, to determine the feasibility of a large dual-purpose powerwater plant for construction on the Mediterranean coast south of Tel Aviv.
--American experts have visited the United Arab Republic and Tunisia to review water needs there and to study possible ways of solving water-supply problems through desalting.
--The United States has offered the services of the Office of Saline Water, an agency of the Department of the Interior, to the Government of Saudi Arabia as it works to bring water to the arid Jidda area.
--Teams of visitors from Greece, Italy, Spain, Mexico, and other nations have visited U.S. desalting facilities and shared information with this Nation's experts in the field. And the United States recently agreed with the Soviet Union to exchange information and visits by specialists in the waterdesalting field.
Much of the information about desalting provided to other nations has been based on Government and industrial work in desalting to solve domestic water supply problems:
The largest water desalting plant operating in the United States produced over a million gallons of fresh water a day, and even more efficient forms of desalting are under study. The Interior Department's Office of Saline Water has awarded 15 contracts for design studies aimed at achieving a desalting plant which would produce up to 50 million gallons of water per day.
The State of California, the city of San Diego, and the Interior Department cooperated in the construction of the Point Loma Desalting Plant, which was moved to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in 1964 to meet U.S. Navy water needs there.
Discussions have begun between the Interior Department and the State of California for a joint Federal-State research station in California to test components of multi-million gallon per day desalting plants. Studies by the Atomic Energy Commission and the Interior Department are inquiring into the possibility of building a nuclear desalting installation in southern California.
The knowledge developed through these programs will be available at the October symposium to all nations which need it and can benefit from work in the area of saltwater conversion.
Note: The First International Symposium on Water Desalination, held in Washington October 3-9, 1965, was attended by delegates from 54 countries. It was one of the major events of the International Cooperation Year.
See also Items 494, 547, 558.