Lyndon B. Johnson
June 04, 1966

Statement by the President Upon Signing Bill Authorizing Conveyance to Utah of Lands Bordering the Great Salt Lake.
I HAVE signed S. 265, a bill "To authorize the conveyance of certain lands to the State of Utah based upon fair market value."
This bill authorizes the immediate conveyance to Utah of 250,000 acres of Federal land, which border the Great Salt Lake. It allows Utah up to 6 years to determine whether it wishes to pay the fair market value of the land as determined by the Secretary of the Interior. It provides for the reversion of the land to the United States if Utah decides not to pay for all of it. It authorizes Utah to make leases with private parties for use of the land on any terms and conditions it chooses, which leases will be binding on the United States, even if the land reverts to the United States.
I have been assured by Governor Calvin L. Rampton of Utah that the Utah State Land Board will issue leases only on terms and conditions acceptable to the Secretary of the Interior. Inasmuch as this land may revert to the United States, I consider this assurance to be essential to approval of the bill and to the future administration of these potentially valuable lands. In addition I have the assurance of Governor Rampton and the sponsor of the bill, Senator Frank E. Moss, that the State of Utah will purchase the Federal interest in the land at fair market value.
In order that the national interest be fully protected I shall submit to Congress next week an amendment to this law requiring the approval of the Secretary of the Interior of all State leases on this land. I am advised that the appropriate committees will act expeditiously.
Note: The statement was read to the press on Saturday morning, June 4, 1966, at San Antonio, Texas. It was not made public in the form of a White House press release.
As enacted, S. 265, approved on June 3, is Public Law 89-441 (80 Stat. 192). An amendment to the bill was approved by the President on August 23, 1966 (Public Law 89-542, 80 Stat. 349).