Lyndon B. Johnson
June 29, 1967

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the King of Thailand.
THEIR MAJESTIES the King and Queen of Thailand have concluded a three-day official visit to Washington at the invitation of President Johnson. His Majesty discussed with the President at the White House affairs of mutual concern to Thailand and the United States.
The President welcomed His Majesty again to the United States and stated the deep appreciation of Mrs. Johnson and himself for the gracious hospitality extended to them by Their Majesties during the President's visit to Thailand in October 1966.
The President expressed admiration for the rapid economic development and improvement in education and social services that have taken place in Thailand under His Majesty's leadership. The President voiced deep respect for His Majesty's concern that the benefits of this progress extend to every part of the Kingdom.
His Majesty and the President recalled the warm traditional friendship of the United States and Thailand, which is solidly based on common ideals and desire for lasting peace and a world order based on justice and respect for the independence and sovereignty of individual nations. The President noted his admiration for the constructive role of Thailand in furthering regional economic and political cooperation in Southeast Asia.
In their review of the situation in Southeast Asia, the President reaffirmed that the United States regards the .preservation of the independence and integrity of Thailand as vital to the national interest of the United States and to world peace. His Majesty and the President agreed that the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization is the foundation of collective security in the area and that both nations are determined to strengthen the role of the organization in protecting the area against aggression and subversion.
The President stated his admiration and appreciation for the generous and courageous assistance of Thailand to the common effort to protect the Republic of Vietnam and the entire Southeast Asia region against Communist aggression and for the resolute measures of the Royal Thai Government against the subversion directed against Thailand itself.
His Majesty stated the appreciation of the Thai people for the efforts of the U.S. and expressed the determination of Thailand not only to maintain its historic independence but to continue to contribute to the maintenance of the freedom and independence of others threatened by Communist aggression.
His Majesty and the President reaffirmed the historical bonds of friendship between the United States and Thailand and, confident that this is the heartfelt desire of the people of the two countries, pledged to continue close and cordial collaboration, directly and through international organizations, to promote mutual security and world peace.
Note: The joint statement was released at San Antonio, Texas.