Lyndon B. Johnson
March 27, 1968

Remarks of Welcome at the White House to President Tubman of Liberia.
Mr. President, Mrs. Tubman, Secretary and Mrs. Rusk, distinguished guests:
There are two flags flying here, each of them with a star and stripe in red, white, and blue. They speak more powerfully than any words of all that binds the two nations that meet here in friendship today.
The flag of the Republic of Liberia is fashioned after our own flag. That nation's Constitution and legal system are also drawn from an American example. We are proud to recognize this evidence of an extraordinary and a very enduring friendship.
It began in 1816 with a blow for freedom. The Congress of the United States struck the chains from 88 American slaves, freeing them to return to Africa. President Monroe and the American people gave funds and diplomatic aid to help establish a new and an independent nation.
Liberia's first hundred years are called the "century of survival." Big powers and hungry neighbors tried to swallow up that little state. But this was also a century of kinship between the Liberian people and the American people. In crises, the two nations joined to uphold their common and their treasured birthright:

--the idea of self-determination;

--the right of every nation to live free of interference and intimidation by another nation;

--the duty of all nations to make common cause in defending the indivisible freedom and the inseparable peace of mankind.
There are men today who still scorn those ideas; there are men who still assault those rights. There are still small and helpless nations in this world that come under vicious attack.
But there are also men who have known the fight for survival--who have learned the necessity for free men to unite against aggression-and who today accept the duty of sharing in the struggle for peace in the world.
In all the years of our long partnership, Liberia and America have given many such men to each other, and have given them to the world. One man has stood out among them for a quarter of a century now. I am proud to welcome America's staunch friend--one of Africa's most senior and most respected statesmen--President Tubman of Liberia.
He is no stranger to this house or to our hearts. This is his fourth visit to our land and I can just recall his first visit some 25 years ago to meet with our great President, Franklin D. Roosevelt.
President Tubman has seen the world transformed since that first visit. His leadership has helped to charge a most electrifying and eventful period of change. President Roosevelt saw its promise and he also saw its peril when he looked ahead just before his death. "The only limit to our realization of tomorrow," he said, "will be our doubts of today. Let us move forward with strong and active faith."
You moved your nation and your continent forward, Mr. President.
Twenty-five years ago, you stood almost alone as an independent nation in a largely colonial Africa. As we meet here today, more than 30 African states now stand with you as masters of their own destiny.
That, I think, is a reflection--a reflection of your own deep faith in freedom, your own belief that the nations of Africa must join as equals and must advance in unity. We admire your vital contribution to the creation of the Organization for African Unity. We encourage your efforts to enlarge regional cooperation, and we hope that your forthcoming West African summit conference in Monrovia will add to your success.
You have stabilized and you have enlarged the life of your own people with a unification policy extending the franchise and the representation throughout your land.
You have made vast improvements in the physical, educational, and administrative structure of your own country.
Your open door policy has drawn foreign capital to greatly speed your own economic development.
We have stood together, Mr. President, through all the trials as well as through all the triumphs of this past quarter of a century. We have followed President Roosevelt's very good advice, moving forward with "strong and active faith."
So let us continue in that spirit, allowing no doubts of today to limit the promise of what we can achieve tomorrow. Let the flags of our two nations fly together, as they do here today, marking a place of honor and a place of hope where free men can rally in peaceful and always progressive purpose.
Mrs. Johnson and I are most happy and very honored to welcome you and Mrs. Tubman back to this land that is made up of your good friends--and always of your very firm partners.
Note: The President spoke at 11:45 a.m. on the South Lawn at the White House, where President William V. S. Tubman was given a formal welcome with full military honors. In his opening words president Johnson also referred to Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Mrs. Rusk.
President Tubman responded as follows:
Mr. President:
It is a moment of pleasure for me and Mrs. Tubman to be received by you at this time. This is true not only in times of unbroken peace and serene prosperity, but even when times are troubled and testing--as they are today.
The close ties between our two nations have existed for more than a century--and happily, show no sign of slackening.
Nevertheless, the reaffirmation on occasions as this serve to remind us of the vitality of the bonds of our relations and to demonstrate once more that rich dividends can flow from our traditional association.
The fact that that friendship has remained solid and secure over the years is not explained by the material advantages we have derived from it, but rather by its having grown out of our sincere devotion and dedication to the principles and ideals of constitutional democracy.
It is my conviction, Mr. President, that the principles asserted in your Declaration of Independence and enshrined in ours, which have unfailingly sustained us in the past, will continue to be the bedrock of our policies and broad highway along which our two peoples will always travel.
As we meet today, I am sure, Mr. President, that the hopes of the Liberian people are high and that they are listening with interest for the results of our meeting. This, I believe, applies as well to other parts of Africa.
They have heard of your many pronouncements and have been moved by your personal interest in the future of Africa. They believe that in your heart you are looking at all times for the right answers to some of the problems facing them.
In particular, your program for education, health, and general welfare as a concerted effort in the world has deeply excited them.
As you and your great people have in the past faced and overcome numerous challenges, we know that America is ready to help Africa face and overcome the challenges of our times.
I believe that from our meeting I will be able to return home and tell my people how deeply you and your great people are committed to bring about a new day--not only for Africa, but for mankind.
For the warm welcome which you and the American people have accorded us, I thank you--and with my thanks go the thanks and good will of the Liberian people. They wish me to express their continued deep regard for and sense of friendship with you and the people of the United States.