Lyndon B. Johnson
March 28, 1965

Statement by the President on Federal Employment of Mentally Retarded Persons.
OVER a year ago, in January 1964, we inaugurated a program to open routine jobs in the Federal Government to mentally retarded but occupationally qualified persons. Our hope and intent was to demonstrate the useful potential of individuals suffering mental as well as physical handicaps without creating extra jobs especially for such persons--and without compromising the quality or efficiency of the Federal work force.
Chairman John Macy of the Civil Service Commission has just reported to me the results of our first full-year effort under this pioneering program. What has been done by the Federal agencies is gratifying and what has been learned from the program is most useful to our further planning. The significant facts are these:
--Under the program for Federal employment of the mentally retarded, 361 appointments were made during the first year.
--At the end of the year, 88 percent of these appointments were rated as good placements, with the individuals performing their duties in a "satisfactory" to "outstanding" manner.
--Supervisory officers report that the ability of 23 such employees to perform their assigned tasks remains under study at this time.
--Only a 21 employees--5.5 percent of the original total-have been separated from the Federal service for inability to meet the performance standards or make necessary social adjustments.
This is a remarkable record. I am gratified by the cooperation and understanding of the departments and agencies in their conduct of this effort.
The Treasury Department led all others in number of hires with 69 appointments. Other leaders include: Post Office, 59 hires; Army, 40; Veterans Administration, 35; and Health, Education, and Welfare, 30. Most appointments have been to relatively simple, highly repetitive, and lower paid jobs. The fact that the mentally retarded are succeeding in such positions is of significance to private employers since these are the kinds of jobs in which employers find it most difficult to retain competent and reliable workers.
It is noteworthy, however, that more than 40 different job titles are listed among those for which Government has hired retarded persons. These include several kinds of jobs not previously considered within the abilities of retardates, such as receptionists, clerk-typists, engineering aides, carpenters, and physical science aides. Slightly more than half of all the retarded appointed to Federal jobs have entered clerical or office work.
The success of the program has not been confined to the Washington area Federal offices. Approximately half of all appointments made in 1964 were in the Washington area. However, 196 appointments were made in field offices in various States. The State of New York led all others, with vocational rehabilitation officials there certifying 39 of the persons appointed. The State of Washington followed with 22, California with 17, Pennsylvania with 13, and Illinois with 10.
Chairman Macy has pointed out to me that while very substantial progress--far exceeding our early expectations--has been made, there remains a number of problems and, as he expresses it, "We still have far to go." I have directed Chairman Macy to continue his effective work and leadership on this program during the current year and I know he will receive the cooperation of all executive agencies in advancing the objectives of this useful and humane program.
Note: Mr. Macy's report to the President on Federal employment of the mentally handicapped is entitled "For All To See" (mimeographed, 7 pp. plus tables).