Lyndon B. Johnson
March 02, 1965

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House on Government Use of Automatic Data Processing Equipment
Dear Mr. President: (Dear Mr. Speaker:)
The use of automatic data processing equipment during the past ten years has contributed significantly to increased effectiveness and rising productivity in governmental operations. The electronic computer has enabled the Government to carry out programs which otherwise would have been impossible. Better and more economical services to the public have been achieved through the use of this equipment.
Government policies with respect to the acquisition and use of automatic data processing equipment have been a matter of interest to a number of congressional committees. In 1963, in response to a congressional request, President Kennedy directed the Bureau of the Budget to undertake a comprehensive review of this subject and to prepare a report to the Congress. This study is now complete. The suggestions for improvement outlined in the enclosed report have my approval.
I have requested the Director of the Bureau of the Budget to work with the interested committees of the Congress and with the executive agencies concerned to assure the most economical and effective use of this highly important area of management.
The Bureau of the Budget at an early date will set forth, in a Circular, specific Government-wide responsibilities of the Bureau of the Budget, General Services Administration, Department of Commerce, and Civil Service Commission, to carry out the recommendations contained in the report.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: This is the text or identical letters addressed to the Honorable Hubert H. Humphrey, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House of Representatives. The letter was made public as part of a White House release announcing the President's transmittal to Congress of the "Report to the President on the Management of Automatic Data Processing in the Federal Government." The report, summarized in the release, was prepared by the Bureau of the Budget. It is printed in Senate Document 15 (89th Cong., 1st sess.).
On March 6 the Bureau of the Budget issued a 5-page circular (Bureau of the Budget Circular No. A-71) to the beads of executive departments and agencies, entitled "Responsibilities for the administration and management of automatic data processing activities."