Lyndon B. Johnson
March 29, 1965

Proclamation 3650—Bennett Place Commemoration

The true unity of our Nation is more than a union of States. It is a unity of spirit, of human hearts, and aspirations and hopes. It is not static but is ever growing, for its work is never done.
The true spirit of American unity is one of challenge, of new goals to be sought and wan. It is the spirit of ceaseless striving by all of us-by Americans of every generation-to attain those great common purposes that spring from our rich and marvelous diversity and yet transcend it.
A moving and poignant example of this spirit occurred nearly one hundred years ago in the peace negotiations between General William T. Sherman and General Joseph E. Johnston, held at the Bennett Place, near the City of Durham, North Carolina. Those opposing generals sought more than a mere cessation of hostilities, more than a reunion of States. They looked to the future. They sought a peace for a reunited people, a peace that would be nationwide in scope, permanent in duration, and based on mutual understanding, fraternal affection, and concord of purpose.
By a joint resolution approved March 29, 1965, the Congress of the United States has requested the President to issue a proclamation reminding the American people of the spirit of national unity that is symbolized by the Bennett Place, near the City of Durham, North Carolina, and of commemorative ceremonies to be held there by the Governor and people of the State of North Carolina on April 25, 1965.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, hereby call upon the American people to remember and to reflect upon that spirit of national unity; and I urge those who can do so to attend the centennial ceremonies to be held at the Bennett Place, near the City of Durham, North Carolina, on April 25, 1965, pursuant to the cordial invitation of the Governor and people of that State.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this 29th day of March in the year of bur Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-five, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-ninth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
DEAN RUSK,

Secretary of State.