Lyndon B. Johnson
March 16, 1964

Special Message to the Congress Proposing a Nationwide War on the Sources of Poverty
To the Congress of the United States:
We are citizens of the richest and most fortunate nation in the history of the world.
One hundred and eighty years ago we were a small country struggling for survival on the margin of a hostile land.
Today we have established a civilization of free men which spans an entire continent.
With the growth of our country has come opportunity for our people--opportunity to educate our children, to use our energies in productive work, to increase our leisure-opportunity for almost every American to hope that through work and talent he could create a better life for himself and his family.
The path forward has not been an easy one.
But we have never lost sight of our goal: an America in which every citizen shares all the opportunities of his society, in which every man has a chance to advance his welfare to the limit of his capacities.
We have come a long way toward this goal.
We still have a long way to go.
The distance which remains is the measure of the great unfinished work of our society.
To finish that work I have called for a national war on poverty. Our objective: total victory.
There are millions of Americans--one fifth of our people--who have not shared in the abundance which has been granted to most of us, and on whom the gates of opportunity have been closed.
What does this poverty mean to those who endure it ?
It means a daily struggle to secure the necessities for even a meager existence. It means that the abundance, the comforts, the opportunities they see all around them are beyond their grasp.
Worst of all, it means hopelessness for the young.
The young man or woman who grows up without a decent education, in a broken home, in a hostile and squalid environment, in ill health or in the face of racial injustice-that young man or woman is often trapped in a life of poverty.
He does not have the skills demanded by a complex society. He does not know how to acquire those skills. He faces a mounting sense of despair which drains initiative and ambition and energy.
Our tax cut will create millions of new jobs--new exits from poverty.
But we must also strike down all the barriers which keep many from using those exits.
The war on poverty is not a struggle simply to support people, to make them dependent on the generosity of others.
It is a struggle to give people a chance.
It is an effort to allow them to develop and use their capacities, as we have been allowed to develop and use ours, so that they can share, as others share, in the promise of this nation.
We do this, first of all, because it is right that we should.
From the establishment of public education and land grant colleges through agricultural extension and encouragement to industry, we have pursued the goal of a nation with full and increasing opportunities for all its citizens.
The war on poverty is a further step in that pursuit.
We do it also because helping some will increase the prosperity of all.
Our fight against poverty will be an investment in the most valuable of our resources--the skills and strength of our people.
And in the future, as in the past, this investment will return its cost many fold to our entire economy.
If we can raise the annual earnings of 10 million among the poor by only $1,000 we will have added 14 billion dollars a year to our national output. In addition we can make important reductions in public assistance payments which now cost us 4 billion dollars a year, and in the large costs of fighting crime and delinquency, disease and hunger.
This is only part of the story.
Our history has proved that each time we broaden the base of abundance, giving more people the chance to produce and consume, we create new industry, higher production, increased earnings and better income for all.
Giving new opportunity to those who have little will enrich the lives of all the rest.
Because it is right, because it is wise, and because, for the first time in our history, it is possible to couquer poverty, I submit, for the consideration of the Congress and the country, the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964•
The Act does not merely expand old programs or improve what is already being done.
It charts a new course.
It strikes at the causes, not just the consequences of poverty.
It can be a milestone in our one-hundred eighty year search for a better life for our people.
This Act provides five basic opportunities.
It will give almost half a million underprivileged young Americans the opportunity to develop skills, continue education, and find useful work.
It will give every American community the opportunity to develop a comprehensive plan to fight its own poverty--and help them to carry out their plans.
It will give dedicated Americans the opportunity to enlist as volunteers in the war against poverty.
It will give many workers and farmers the opportunity to break through particular barriers which bar their escape from poverty.
It will give the entire nation the opportunity for a concerted attack on poverty through the establishment, under my direction, of the Office of Economic Opportunity, a national headquarters for the war against poverty.
This is how we propose to create these opportunities.
First we will give high priority to helping young Americans who lack skills, who have not completed their education or who cannot complete it because they are too poor.
The years of high school and college age are the most critical stage of a young person's life. If they are not helped then, many will be condemned to a life of poverty which they, in turn, will pass on to their children.
I therefore recommend the creation of a Job Corps, a Work-Training Program, and a Work Study Program.
A new national Job Corps will build toward an enlistment of 100,000 young men. They will be drawn from those whose background, health and education make them least fit for useful work.
Those who volunteer will enter more than 100 Camps and Centers around the country.
Half of these young men will work, in the first year, on special conservation projects to give them education, useful work experience and to enrich the natural resources of the country.
Half of these young men will receive, in the first year, a blend of training, basic education and work experience in Job Training Centers.
These are not simply camps for the underprivileged. They are new educational institutions, comparable in innovation to the land grant colleges. Those who enter them will emerge better qualified to play a productive role in American society.
A new national Work-Training Program operated by the Department of Labor will provide work and training for 200,000 American men and women between the ages of 16 and 21. This will be developed through state and local governments and non-profit agencies.
Hundreds of thousands of young Americans badly need the experience, the income, and the sense of purpose which useful full or part-time work can bring. For them such work may mean the difference between finishing school or dropping out. Vital community activities from hospitals and playgrounds to libraries and settlement houses are suffering because there are not enough people to staff them.
We are simply bringing these needs together.
A new national Work-Study Program operated by the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare will provide federal funds for part-time jobs for 140,000 young Americans who do not go to college because they cannot afford it.
There is no more senseless waste than the waste of the brainpower and skill of those who are kept from college by economic circumstance. Under this program they will, in a great American tradition, be able to work their way through school.
They and the country will be richer for it.
Second, through a new Community Action program we intend to strike at poverty at its source--in the streets of our cities and on the farms of our countryside among the very young and the impoverished old.
This program asks men and women throughout the country to prepare long-range plans for the attack on poverty in their own local communities.
These are not plans prepared in Washington and imposed upon hundreds of different situations.
They are based on the fact that local citizens best understand their own problems, and know best how to deal with those problems.
These plans will be local plans striking at the many untilled needs which underlie poverty in each community, not just one or two. Their components and emphasis will differ as needs differ.
These plans will be local plans calling upon all the resources available to the community-federal and state, local and private, human and material.
And when these plans are approved by the Office of Economic Opportunity, the federal government will finance up to 9070 of the additional cost for the first two years.
The most enduring strength of our nation is the huge reservoir of talent, initiative and leadership which exists at every level of our society.
Through the Community Action Program we call upon this, our greatest strength, to overcome our greatest weakness.
Third, I ask for the authority to recruit and train skilled volunteers for the war against poverty.
Thousands of Americans have volunteered to serve the needs of other lands.
Thousands more want the chance to serve the needs of their own land.
They should have that chance.
Among older people who have retired, as well as among the young, among women as well as men, there are many Americans who are ready to enlist in our war against poverty.
They have skills and dedication. They are badly needed.
If the State requests them, if the community needs and will use them, we will recruit and train them and give them the chance to serve.
Fourth, we intend to create new opportunities for certain hard-hit groups to break out of the pattern of poverty.
Through a new program of loans and guarantees we can provide incentives to those who will employ the unemployed.
Through programs of work and retraining for unemployed fathers and mothers we can help them support their families in dignity while preparing themselves for new

work.
Through funds to purchase needed land, organize cooperatives, and create new and adequate family farms we can help those whose life on the land has been a struggle without hope.
Filth, I do not intend that the war against poverty become a series of uncoordinated and unrelated efforts--that it perish for lack of leadership and direction.
Therefore this bill creates, in the Executive Office of the President, a new Office of Economic Opportunity. Its Director will be my personal Chief of Staff for the War against poverty. I intend to appoint Sargent Shriver to this post.
He will be directly responsible for these new programs. He will work with and through existing agencies of the government.
This program--the Economic Opportunity Act--is the foundation of our war against poverty. But it does not stand alone.
For the past three years this government has advanced a number of new proposals which strike at important areas of need and distress.
I ask the Congress to extend those which are already in action, and to establish those which have already been proposed.
There are programs to help badly distressed areas such as the Area Redevelopment Act, and the legislation now being prepared to help Appalachia.
There are programs to help those without training find a place in today's complex society--such as the Manpower Development Training Act and the Vocational Education Act for youth.
There are programs to protect those who are specially vulnerable to the ravages of poverty--hospital insurance for the elderly, protection for migrant farm workers, a food stamp program for the needy, coverage for millions not now protected by a minimum wage, new and expanded unemployment benefits for men out of work, a Housing and Community Development bill for those seeking decent homes.
Finally there are programs which help the entire country, such as aid to education which, by raising the quality of schooling available to every American child, will give a new chance for knowledge to the children of the poor.
I ask immediate action on all these programs.
What you are being asked to consider is not a simple or an easy program. But poverty is not a simple or an easy enemy.
It cannot be driven from the land by a single attack on a single front. Were this so we would have conquered poverty long ago.
Nor can it be conquered by government alone.
For decades American labor and American business, private institutions and private individuals have been engaged in strengthening our economy and offering new opportunity to those in need.
We need their help, their support, and their full participation.
Through this program we offer new incentives and new opportunities for cooperation, so that all the energy of our nation, not merely the efforts of government, can be brought to bear on our common enemy.
Today, for the first time in our history, we have the power to strike away the barriers [p.380] to full participation in our society. Having the power, we have the duty.
The Congress is charged by the Constitution to "provide . . . for the general welfare of the United States." Our present abundance is a measure of its success in fulfilling that duty. Now Congress is being asked to extend that welfare to all our people.
The President of the United States is President of all the people in every section of the country. But this office also holds a special responsibility to the distressed and disinherited, the hungry and the hopeless of this abundant nation.
It is in pursuit of that special responsibility that I submit this Message to you today.
The new program I propose is within our means. Its cost of 970 million dollars is 1 percent of our national budget--and every dollar I am requesting for this program is already included in the budget I sent to Congress in January.
But we cannot measure its importance by its cost.
For it charts an entirely new course of hope for our people.
We are fully aware that this program will not eliminate all the poverty in America in a few months or a few years. Poverty is deeply rooted and its causes are many.
But this program will show the way to new opportunities for millions of our fellow citizens.
It will provide a lever with which we can begin to open the door to our prosperity for those who have been kept outside.
It will also give us the chance to test our weapons, to try our energy and ideas and imagination for the many battles yet to come. As conditions change, and as experience illuminates our difficulties, we will be prepared to modify our strategy.
And this program is much more than a beginning.
Rather it is a commitment. It is a total commitment by this President, and this Congress, and this nation, to pursue victory over the most ancient of mankind's enemies.
On many historic occasions the President has requested from Congress the authority to move against forces which were endangering the well-being of our country. This is such an occasion.
On similar occasions in the past we have often been called upon to wage war against foreign enemies which threatened our freedom. Today we are asked to declare war on a domestic enemy which threatens the strength of our nation and the welfare of our people.
If we now move forward against this enemy--if we can bring to the challenges of peace the same determination and strength which has brought us victory in war--then this day and this Congress will have won a secure and honorable place in the history of the nation, and the enduring gratitude of generations of Americans yet to come.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The draft bill and a section by section analysis were released with the President's message. They are printed in House Document 243 (88th Cong., 2d sess.).
For the President's remarks upon signing the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, see Item 528.