Lyndon B. Johnson
March 23, 1966

Statement by the President on the Occasion of World Meteorological Day.
ON JUNE 10, 1964, at Holy Cross College, I pledged that this Nation would move ahead with plans for a worldwide weather system, in collaboration with other nations, toward a goal beneficial to all mankind.
On the occasion of World Meteorological Day, I now reaffirm that pledge.
Today, we recognize the efforts of scientists and technicians everywhere--working as individuals and working as a single scientific community--to improve our understanding and prediction of the weather.
This day symbolizes for us--and for all mankind--a new dawn of hope for a better, safer, and more meaningful life.

In a world grown tired of wars, it commits all nations to work together in joint programs of peace.
It looks to the time when all our science and technology, and all the wonders of the space age, will give us the power of which man has always dreamed--not the power of one nation over another, but the power of the human race over the forces of nature.
We know now that our environment is global and indivisible. Knowing this, it follows that the only way to achieve significant improvement of weather services and prediction is by vigorous international cooperation and by worldwide dissemination of weather data.
The instrument of this program is the World Meteorological Organization--a specialized agency of the United Nations with a membership of 127 countries. Through the World Meteorological Organization, the concept of a World Weather Watch is now taking shape. On this occasion, I am proud to say that the United States strongly supports international cooperation in this vital field.
Much must be accomplished to transform hope into reality. Scientifically, we must move toward a better understanding of our environment. Technologically, we must move toward developing improved systems. But there are no insuperable obstacles--and the opportunities are too great for us to ignore.
Our own Nation's efforts in this worldwide project will continue to be coordinated by the Environmental Science Services Administration under the leadership of Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor.
An Interagency Committee for International Meteorological Programs has already developed a series of proposals to carry us well into the decade of the seventies. I have asked the Secretary of Commerce, Dr. Donald Hornig, my Science Adviser, and Charles Schultze, the Director of the Budget, to study these proposals and to recommend to me a plan of action for America's role in this important international program.
Note: For the President's commencement address on June 10, 1964, at Holy Cross College, see 1963-64 volume, this series, Book 1, Item 396.