Lyndon B. Johnson
March 25, 1965

Statement to the Cabinet on the Need for Economical Operation of Overseas Programs
ALL DEPARTMENTS-and virtually all agencies--have personnel and programs abroad. From time to time, I have expressed to you individually my views in regard to this. I do not believe it is necessary--or desirable--for the executive branch to duplicate globally the pattern of domestic responsibilities and operations at home.
I have recently been giving much thought to such matters. And today I want to share some observations--and make a recommendation-in this regard.
Our programs around the world are all important to the accomplishment of our foreign policy objectives. But our resources and money are always scarce. They are never plentiful enough to cover every need and to fulfill every objective.
It is important that all of us--as managers-make certain that our people abroad and the money we spend abroad are used to achieve the maximum support of the accomplishment of our foreign policy objectives.
We must insure that every person is being utilized to the fullest--and that every dollar spent is a dollar needed to accomplish our purposes.
While I could speak at length on this, I believe action is more needed than words.
For that reason, I am today asking the following:
That the Secretary of State, who is responsible for recommending our foreign policy objectives and the Director of the Budget, who is responsible for recommending distribution of resources to accomplish those objectives, meet with all of you who have overseas programs to look at our operations in 10 or 15 countries.
This would be done on an experimental basis--before our next budget enters preparation.
The review should be on a country basis-with all U.S. agencies, all U.S. programs, and all U.S. policies related to people and programs being reviewed country by country. The object should be to determine that we are doing the things that are most essential for us to do, that there are no unnecessary people and no unnecessary programs--and that all our money is being well spent.
In countries where such reviews are conducted, I shall expect each agency to respect the levels established for each of our programs by Secretary Rusk and Mr. Gordon in the allocation of funds and resources for the ensuing year--and in the projection of our plans.
I believe that this kind of country-by-country review--looking at all of our programs as they relate to our objectives in each country--can insure for us better management in the fuller utilization of all our resources. I also believe that this approach can and will materially strengthen the conduct and execution of the foreign policy of the United States.
Note: The President read the statement at 1:15 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House.