Lyndon B. Johnson
March 25, 1965

Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 1 of 1965, Bureau of Customs.
To the Congress of the United States:
All that we do to serve the people of this land must be done, as has been my insistent pledge, with the least cost and the most effectiveness.
In my State of the Union, I announced it was this Administration's intention to "reshape and re-organize" the Executive Branch. This goal had one objective: "to meet more effectively the tasks of today."
I report today now one step taken forward toward that goal as part of our progress "on new economies we were planning to make."
I submit today a plan for re-organization in the Bureau of Customs of the Department of the Treasury.
At present the Bureau maintains 113 independent field offices, each reporting directly to Customs headquarters in Washington, D.C. Under a modernization program of which this reorganization plan is an integral part, the Secretary of the Treasury proposes to establish six regional offices to supervise all Customs field activities. The tightened management controls achieved from these improvements will make possible a net annual saving of nine million dollars within a few years.
An essential feature will be the abolition of the offices of all Presidential appointees in the Customs Service. The program cannot be effectively carried out without this step.
The following offices, therefore, would be eliminated: collectors of customs, comptrollers of customs, surveyors of customs, and appraisers of merchandise, to which appointments are now required to be made by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Incumbents of abolished offices will be given consideration for suitable employment under the civil-service laws in any positions in Customs for which they may be qualified.
When this reorganization is completed, all officials and employees of the Bureau of Customs will be appointed under the civil service laws.
All of the functions of the offices which will be abolished are presently vested in the Secretary of the Treasury by Reorganization Plan No. 26 of 1950 which gives the Secretary power to redelegate these functions. He will exercise this power as the existing offices are abolished.
The estimate of savings that will be achieved by the program of Customs modernization and improvement, of which this reorganization plan is a part, is based on present enforcement levels, business volume, and salary scales. Of the amounts saved, approximately one million dollars a year will be from salaries no longer paid because of the abolition of offices.
The proposed new organizational framework looks to the establishment of new offices at both headquarters and field levels and abolition of present offices.
This results in a net reduction of more than fifty separate principal field offices by concentration of supervisory responsibilities in fewer officials in charge of regional and district activities. In addition to the six offices of Regional Commissioner, about twenty-five offices of District Director will be established. The regional Commissioners and District Directors will assume the overall principal supervisory responsibilities and functions of collectors of customs, appraisers of merchandise, comptrollers of customs, laboratories, and supervising customs agents.
At the headquarters level, four new offices will be established to replace seven divisions. A new position of Special Assistant to the Commissioner will be created and charged with responsibility for insuring that all Customs employees conduct themselves in strict compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. Up to now this function has been one of a number lodged with an existing division.
After investigation I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1965 is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2(a) of the Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended.
It should be emphasized that abolition by Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1965 of the offices of collector of customs, comptroller of customs, surveyor of customs, and appraiser of merchandise will in no way prejudice any right of any person affected by the laws administered by the Bureau of Customs. The rights of importers and others, for example, before the Customs Court, arising out of the administration of such functions will remain unaffected. In addition it should be emphasized that all essential services to the importing, exporting, and traveling public will continue to be performed.
This reorganization plan will permit a needed modernization of the organization and procedure of the Bureau of Customs. It will permit a more effective administration of the customs laws.
I urge the Congress to permit Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1965 to become effective.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

March 25, 1965
Note: Reorganization Plan 1 of 1965 is published in the Federal Register (30 F.R. 7035). It became effective on May 25, 1965.