Lyndon B. Johnson
March 21, 1967

Remarks at Andrews Air Force Base Near Washington Upon Returning From the Guam Conference.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen:
As I said upon my departure from Guam, we discussed seven of our major concerns at our meeting there.
First, the military progress of the war, both in the South and in the North.
Second, the political progress that is being made now in South Vietnam. Prime Minister Ky gave me a copy of the new Constitution, which the freely elected Constituent Assembly has adopted, and which the Directorate has just approved. This is the third and most significant step that South Vietnam has taken toward granting its people the fundamental rights of democracy.
Third, we discussed the morale, the health, the training, the food, the clothing, and equipment of our superb young fighting men. I questioned General Westmoreland very closely on these matters. His response was extremely gratifying to me.
Fourth, the national reconciliation program in Vietnam.
Fifth, the land reform program, which is moving steadily forward. Premier Ky told me that he had distributed 27,000 titles just recently.
Sixth, the extent of civilian casualties and what is being done to help those who are injured or who are wounded by the war.
Seventh, the possibilities of bringing an end to this conflict by an honorable settlement.
We did not adopt any specific or spectacular new programs at this meeting. The nature of this war is not amenable to spectacular programs or easy solutions. It requires courage, perseverance, and dedication.
During my flight home I learned that Hanoi had made public an exchange of letters between me and Ho Chi Minh. His reply to me of mid-February and his earlier public reply to His Holiness, the Pope, were regrettable rebuffs to a genuine effort to move toward peace. This has been the consistent attitude of Hanoi to many efforts that have been made by us, by other governments, by groups of governments, and by many leading personalities throughout the world. Nevertheless, we shall persevere in our efforts to find an honorable peace. Until that is achieved, of course, we shall continue to do our duty in Vietnam.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 6:53 p.m. at Andrews Air Force Base.
For the text of the President's letter to President Ho Chi Minh of North Vietnam, see Item 136.