Lyndon B. Johnson
May 01, 1965

Statement by the President in Response to a Progress Report by the Antarctic Policy Group.
I HAVE been deeply impressed by the sensible way in which the 12 nations active in Antarctica work together. In that frozen continent we have, through international cooperation, shown how nations of many different outlooks can cooperate for peaceful purposes and mutual benefit. National differences are no barrier to a common effort in which everyone gains and no one loses. The scientific findings of all countries are pooled for the benefit of all. Men in danger or in need can call for help knowing that it will be given unstintingly by any country that can provide it.
We are now celebrating International Cooperation Year. It is my earnest hope that the same success that has marked the Antarctic program can be extended to every field of international endeavor, not only during this special year, but in future years as well.
The United States today pursues a vigorous program in Antarctica. We have begun to explore the southern ocean and the last great unknown reaches of the polar plateau. We have established new research stations in west Antarctica and on the Antarctic peninsula. We have completed geologic surveys of most of the ice-free areas of west Antarctica. We have photographed hundreds of thousands of square miles for mapping purposes. We are conducting scientific programs to study the unique physical and biological features of the area.
We are pioneering new concepts of operations on the ice. We introduced nuclear power to Antarctica. Advanced construction techniques soften the rigors of polar life. Specialized aircraft and surface vehicles enable us to reach any point on the continent, and to operate effectively when we get there.
From our activities and those of other countries we acquire increased knowledge of the world in which we all live and which we must understand better to meet the challenge of the future. Already the research program has disclosed facts which may affect profoundly the future of communications, of space travel, and of the world's food supply-
The kind of international cooperation that has become accepted practice in Antarctica is both practical and mutually beneficial. Argentina provided transportation and logistic support for three U.S. biological teams this year, and has also made facilities available to us at its Melchior Station. The United States and four other nations man an Antarctic Weather Center in Melbourne, Australia.
This year the first leg of a great traverse across the savage and unknown polar plateau was made by an American team which included a Belgian and a Norwegian. A number of Chilean scientists participate in our activities. When our research ship, the Eltanin, encountered a medical emergency, the Chilean Air Force and Navy provided drugs to the ship at sea, and hospital facilities in port.
New Zealand continues to welcome our advance headquarters in Christchurch, N.Z., and to participate in the research programs on the ice. We, in turn, provide them with transportation and other logistic support.
This year again an American scientist is doing research at the Soviet Mirnyy Station and a Soviet scientist is studying at our McMurdo Station. One of the monitoring instruments of our cosmic ray program is installed at a Soviet station, where the Russians are operating it for us.
France, Japan, South Africa, and the United Kingdom are actively cooperating with the United States on a variety of Antarctic projects.
The peaceful framework on which these widespread activities depend is the Antarctic treaty. The countries adhering to the treaty have pledged that Antarctica shall be used for peaceful purposes only. No activities of a military nature are permitted. Nuclear explosions or dumping atomic waste is prohibited. But scientific research is open to all, and international cooperation in that research is encouraged.
Any signatory country may satisfy itself that the treaty is being observed by inspecting any station or expedition anywhere in Antarctica. In short, the United States and other signatories have agreed that it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica shall continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international discord.
Note: The statement was part of a White House release which noted that the Antarctic Policy Group had been established in April at the President's request. The Group, composed of representatives of the Departments of State and Defense and the National Science Foundation, was charged, the release stated, "with guiding our Antarctic policy and helping develop the U.S. program in that region."
The progress report was made orally.