Lyndon B. Johnson
May 01, 1965

Statement by the President on the New Speed Records Set by the United States Air Force.
I HAVE just been informed this afternoon that the United States Air Force has today claimed new world records for aircraft speed on a straight course of over 2,000 miles per hour and on a closed course of 1,688 miles per hour.
The record for a straight course flight was set by a YF-12A aircraft on a flight made today at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., with a crew consisting of Col. Robert L. Stephens and Lt. Col. Daniel Andre.
The record for the closed course flight was set by the same aircraft but with a different crew--Maj. Walter F. Daniel and Capt. James P. Cooney. The flight was made in accordance with the internationally recognized rules of the FAI (International Federation of Aeronautics) with headquarters in Paris, and the new records will have to be certified by that organization.
The former records held by the Soviet Union were 1,665.80 miles per hour on a straight course and 1,491.9 miles per hour on a closed course.
The YF-12A is the aircraft whose existence I was privileged to announce on February 29, 1964, when it was officially designated as the A-11. At that time I noted that the performance of this aircraft "far exceeds that of any other aircraft in the world today" and that its development was made possible "by major advancements in aircraft technology of great significance to both military and commercial application." The flights today justified the expectations of those who contributed to the development of this magnificent aircraft.
This aircraft and its performance stand as a remarkable and impressive tribute to the genius, initiative, and leadership of American science and technology and to all who have participated in its conception and development. Particular praise is due the designer, Mr. Kelly Johnson, whose imaginative and creative talent has done so much to maintain and advance our Nation's leadership in the aeronautical field.
The record-setting flights today are a memorable achievement and all Americans can take pride in this accomplishment.