Lyndon B. Johnson
May 16, 1968

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the President of Tunisia.
ON May 15, 1968, President Johnson welcomed President Bourguiba of Tunisia as his guest for a State Visit to the United States. The two Presidents had a mutually valuable exchange of views on Tunisian-United States relations and on African, regional and world developments.
President Bourguiba described the successful efforts Tunisia is making to consolidate its independence, develop its economy and achieve new social goals for all its people, men and women, young and old. He expressed Tunisia's appreciation for American assistance, which has contributed significantly to Tunisian economic development. President Johnson recalled the long-standing interest of the United States in Tunisia's efforts to achieve in peace and security its goals of economic development and social progress.
President Bourguiba expressed his understanding of America's aim in supporting the principle of national independence and self-determination in Southeast Asia and commended President Johnson for seeking talks on the Viet Nam problem. The two Presidents shared the hope that a general easing of world tensions would be brought about by patient and persistent efforts to achieve a just settlement in Viet Nam.
President Bourguiba stressed the urgency of a just settlement of the Middle East problem. President Johnson expressed his agreement, and in that connection reiterated his firm belief that justice for all was to be found in the five principles he had enunciated on June 19, 1967. The two Presidents reaffirmed their strong support for the Security Council Resolution of November 22, 1967, as offering the surest road to peace, and called on all Governments to cooperate fully with the Jarring Mission toward this end.
President Johnson noted with great satisfaction the priority given by Tunisia to building up sound and fruitful relations with its Maghrebian neighbors, as well as with other regions of Africa. He explained the United States Government's belief that regional economic cooperation offered an effective means of hastening the process of development and contributing to the lessening of world tensions.
The two Presidents consider that this State Visit, with the many demonstrations of American friendship for Tunisia which it evokes, is a symbol of the common political philosophy, the belief in freedom, the respect for the dignity of the individual, and the profound disposition toward peace, which are shared by the Tunisian and the American peoples.