Lyndon B. Johnson
May 04, 1966

Remarks Upon Signing Order Establishing the President's Council and the Citizens' Advisory Committee on Recreation and Natural Beauty
Members of the Cabinet, distinguished friends in the Congress, and invited guests:
I thank you for indulging me while I addressed the first meeting in several months of the President's labor-management advisers in the Fish Room. I had to answer some questions then, so I am a little tardy.
I never think of America's beautification program without a deep feeling of pride-pride in our vision of what our country can be, and pride in what we have already done.
I will say, though, that for all my personal interest in beautification, some people, including some very close to me and on the platform this morning, seem to think that I am not quite interested enough. Sometimes she has to prod me a little bit. Sometimes I would actually swear she is shoving.
But as many of you know, Mrs. Johnson does have a slight, detectable interest in beautification.
It was the poet Wordsworth who said that "Nature never did betray the heart that loved her"--and I think that Lady Bird has ample reason to believe that. There are flowers and trees and beautiful things all through this Capital City this year that seem to nod when she goes by.
So I know this is a happy occasion for her today when I could carry out her suggestion and ask you to come here and redouble our efforts to try to beautify our land.
The Executive order I am about to sign adds two new members to the Government's Recreation Advisory Council: the Federal Power Commission, headed by the White House former General Counsel, Mr. Lee C. White, present Chairman of the Commission; and the General Services Administration, headed by Mr. Lawson B. Knott. In addition to that, it greatly broadens the functions of the Council to cover natural beauty as well as recreation.
To assist and to advise this Council--to give it added direction and to give it increased purpose--I have established a 12-man Citizens' Advisory Committee on Recreation and Natural Beauty. I have asked the distinguished American, Mr. Lauranee Rockefeller, to assume the chairmanship of this Committee, and he has graciously accepted and indicated his willingness to serve his country again. Mr. Rockefeller and most of the members are present with us today.
So I want to say to all of the Committee members that just because they are serving without pay does not mean that they will be serving in an honorary capacity. Any time I get volunteers, I put them to work. That may be one of the reasons that Jack Valenti has made some of the decisions he has made lately.
We have just begun to scratch the surface of ugliness and neglect and decay throughout our countryside and within our cities. The task of this Committee will be to tell us where we go from here.
How can we provide nearby recreation areas that will bring relief from the noise and congestion of our cities?
What can Government departments and agencies do to bring a touch of beauty into the daily lives of all of our citizens?
What can we do to help our State and local governments improve the beauty of locally-owned property?
What can we do to encourage business firms and factories to beautify their surroundings?
What can we do, what can every American do, to become a better conservationist?
What can we do to employ the talents and the energies of our retired citizens in local beautification projects?
Well, these are a few of the questions that could be answered, should be answered soon, if we really plan to pass on to our children a nation that is rich in promise as well as in the past.
Last year, in signing the Assateague Seashore bill, I quoted some words of a great American naturalist. It was Henry David Thoreau who said: "It is a noble country where we dwell, fit for a stalwart race to summer in."
I said then that it remains for us to preserve both that vision and the beauty which gave it rise.
I am asking this morning the members of this new Committee to roll up their sleeves and get to work and begin to provide leadership and inspiration in this effort. From this moment forth, the opportunity for recreation and the daily experience of beauty just must be made a part of our gross national product. For a nation that calls itself great must have spirit as well as have strength, must have poetry as well as have prosperity.
So I ask all of you Americans to join in such greatness.
I just suggested to Senator Jackson in the corridor coming in that I wish he would take every surplus area we have in the United States, as a member of the Armed Services Committee. We have declared hundreds of them surplus, and I know because I get petitions from back home talking about Mr. McNamara's actions. But I wish he would take those areas and sit down with the Secretary of the Interior and see if we could not turn some of those old Army installations, or some of those old Air Force areas, or some of those old Navy yards into recreational areas that are adjacent to where people live.
We have a wonderful Big Bend Park that Lady Bird has been visiting, but it is a long way for me to go to get to stroll in the woods. It is a long way for people to go who live in Washington and Baltimore and Philadelphia and New York and Los Angeles. We need some of these areas right where the people live.
There is not a front yard in the country, there is not an apartment house in the land, there is not a public building anywhere, there is not a street, there is not a sidewalk, and there is not a road that cannot be improved and be made more beautiful.
How to make them more beautiful--when and how and where--is a part of your undertaking.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 10:22 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House before signing Executive Order 11278 "Establishing a President's Council and a Committee on Recreation and Natural Beauty" (2 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 607; 31 F.R. 6681; 3 CFR, 1966 Comp., p. 107). In the course of his remarks he referred to Jack Valenti, Special Assistant to the President, whose decision to resign had recently been announced, Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington, and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara.
On the same day the White House made public a list of members of the Citizens' Advisory Committee and announced that Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor would serve as the chairman of the President's Council (2 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 608).
The Recreation Advisory Council was established by Executive Order 11017 of April 27, 1962 (3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 597). The Recreation Advisory Council was expanded and renamed the President's Council on Recreation and Natural Beauty by Executive Order 11278 (cited above).