Lyndon B. Johnson
May 25, 1967

Press Briefing in Montreal With Prime Minister Pearson of Canada.
Ladies and gentlemen:
I want to tell you about our visit here today and to thank the people of Canada, the distinguished Prime Minister, and the other officials of the Canadian Government for their hospitality.
We had a delightful visit at EXPO. we were thrilled to see what you people had done there in the way of permitting other nations to come here and demonstrate their friendship for your great country and to exchange exhibits and ideas with our neighbors.
I imposed on the Prime Minister by going with him to lunch and counseling with him on the problems that confront the peoples of the world today. We, of course, discussed the situation that exists in the Middle East, the discussions that took place yesterday in the Security Council of the United Nations, and the likely discussions that will take place there in the days ahead.
As you know, we in the United States have a very high regard for Prime Minister Pearson. He has worked with our people over a long period. He has served in our Capital. He has distinguished himself as a citizen of the world. And he is one of the great living experts on the particular area of the world which greatly concerns us now.
The Prime Minister and I exchanged ideas. Our visit was a very agreeable one. We not only talked about the Middle East, but we talked about our respective countries, our problems with each other, the problems that good neighbors do have.
We also talked about the situation in Vietnam, as we have on other occasions. I brought him up to date on the reports that we have from there--our viewpoint. I am returning to Washington very shortly where I will meet Lord Casey from Australia, who is due there at 5:30.
I would summarize our visit by saying my talk with the Prime Minister and others was quite constructive and very agreeable. I would hope that in the days ahead I might have the opportunity to come here for a somewhat more extended stay than the situation today would permit.
I have been President a little over 3 years; and I have had a chance to visit Canada three times. I would like to have some other visits in the future.
Q. Mr. President, would you care to entertain questions?
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't plan to have a press conference.
Q. How about the Prime Minister?
THE PRIME MINISTER. The President is due in Washington at 5:30 to meet with the Governor-General of Australia, so I hope he won't be detained.
I think the President, who I was. so happy to have as my guest at Harrington Lake, has said all that can be said about our talks.
We covered a lot of ground. From my point of view, they were very helpful, indeed, and I am very grateful to the President for getting his viewpoint on some of the very dangerous and difficult international situations that face us today.
I just want to express my gratitude for the President taking time to come here and, as he has indicated, he hopes to get back in our centennial year to Canada for a little longer visit.
So, I think if you will excuse us, I will go to the plane with the President and wave him goodby to Washington.
Reporter: Thank you.
Note: The press briefing was held at 4:15 p.m. at Uplands R.C.A.F. Base in Ottawa at the close of the President's visit to Canada. During his remarks he referred to Richard G. Lord Casey, Governor-General of Australia.
See also Items 237, 238.