Lyndon B. Johnson
November 10, 1964

Remarks by Telephone for Ceremonies Marking the 50th Anniversary of the Port of Houston.
Ladies and gentlemen:
I am very proud to participate in these ceremonies in this way, both as President of the United States and as a former resident and a longtime admirer of the city of Houston.
Back in the early 1930's when Houston was my home, I remember there were those who were skeptical of the value of the ship channel. Today we know that the vision was not too great as some said then, but was, if anything, too small. Many factors have contributed to Houston's growth and the growth of our great gulf coast. No one factor can be singled out for individual credit, but we all know that the reality and the symbolism of the ship channel project had much to do with moving the entire area forward.
There is another factor worthy of mention. In Houston and all along the coast, the industrial growth evident day to day has come almost entirely from products and processes that were unknown even 30 years ago. Our times are marked by the most rapid expansion and explosion of human knowledge ever known. We cannot know what the future will bring, but we do know that we can and that we must put in place the foundation on which that growth can rise in orderly fashion.
Houston, I am proud to say, is still looking ahead and planning ahead, and so is your country. It is my hope that throughout America we can get down to the business of building for a stronger and a more prosperous future by doing the work that will unlock opportunity for all regions of our Nation.
We have great challenges ahead, abroad and at home. I discussed some of them this morning with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense. There is no question of our ability to meet them if we will work to keep the peace and if we will work to pave the way for progress of all our people in all sections of the Nation.
On the 50 years past, you have my congratulations; on the 50 years ahead, you have the Nation's confidence. Houston's destiny and America's destiny is greatness, and that greatness will be fulfilled by the faith we place in our responsible vision.
Now I am happy to press this button to start the construction of Houston's new horizon of expansion in enterprise and progress.
Note: The President spoke by telephone from the LBJ Ranch, Johnson City, Tex.