Lyndon B. Johnson
November 19, 1964

Statement by the President at a Cabinet Meeting: Personnel Appointments.
I AM SURE each of you shares my conviction that the character and effectiveness of our administration will largely be determined by the quality of men and women appointed to leadership positions.
This means our presidential appointees must be men and women of character, ability, and devotion.
I want to conduct a continuing talent search, in all professions and in all parts of the country, to discover these people.
The White House will play a leading part in this search and work closely with you in selecting presidential appointees who meet these high quality standards and who will be strong and responsive representatives of the administration's programs.
Since the men and women selected will directly assist you in carrying out your policy and management responsibilities, they must meet your standards but they must also pass muster as members of the Johnson administration.
I will establish a single office within the White House to work with you and me in meeting these vitally important staffing goals.
For the period between now and the inauguration, I have asked John Macy to assist me and the White House staff in working with you on this important task. He will be talking with you about the pending vacancies and how we can better meet the staffing needs of the administration.
I want to be especially sure that each of you selects a top man to serve as your legislative liaison. Next to the Cabinet officer himself, I consider this the most important position in the department. If we are to get our legislative program through, you must have heavyweights in these jobs-people with political sensitivity and substantive knowledge of your programs. I expect them to keep you thoroughly informed of the situation affecting your programs on the Hill, and in turn, I expect you to keep me informed at all times. You will personally be responsible for your legislation, so I know you will want a congressional liaison office of the first order.