Lyndon B. Johnson
November 02, 1964

Remarks at a Rally in Houston.
Mayor Welch; my friend Senator Ralph Yarborough; one of the wisest and most effective Congressmen in the entire Nation, a man who really knows how to introduce Presidents, Albert Thomas; my good friends, the outstanding Congressmen in the Texas delegation, Congressman Bob Casey, Congressman Jack Brooks, Congressman Clark Thompson; my fellow Texans:
Your warm and generous welcome makes Lady Bird and Lynda and Luci and me know that we are home again among our home folks, our neighbors, and our loyal supporters.
I came back here today to ask again for your help. I hope that the people of Houston will send back to the House of Representatives that able, hardworking Congressman who represents the views of his constituents, Bob Casey. I need Albert Thomas and you need him in the House of Representatives. His advice and his counsel are valuable to both of us.
And in the Senate, no Member of the Senate that I have known since I have been in Washington has more loyally or capably supported a Democratic program, his own President's program, the program of the President, the first President from Texas, than has Ralph Yarborough. When there is a contest you can be sure that you will find Ralph Yarborough fighting for the folks and for what he thinks is right, working for what he believes is just, voting for what he feels is best.
So I will deeply appreciate your voting for these men and putting in a good vote for your able, effective, efficient Congressman at Large, Joe Pool.
These are the final hours of the campaign. Tomorrow, all across our land, the people of America will make their choice for leadership. In an hour or so I will be going to the hill country where I was born to await the people's decision--your decision.
Three hundred and forty-five days ago a senseless tragedy in this State thrust me into this office. In every one of those days I have tried with all that God has given me to do my dead level best, to do what I thought was right.
A President understands that no man is infallible. He learns that people are his cause and their freedom his trust. He learns to believe in their wisdom. Most of all, he prays for the guidance of God as he works for peace in the world.
Thirty-four years ago when I was a very young man I lived in this great city. I taught at the old Sam Houston High School, no more than a dozen blocks from where I stand tonight.
One of the most valuable Americans I know, one of the most competent, capable, dedicated, patriotic persons I have ever met, is a graduate of Sam Houston High School, the University of Houston, and Harvard Business School, my trusted and loyal aide-Jack Valenti of Houston.
But since Jack and I were at Sam Houston High School, the world has changed in these years. But the change has not been all bad or all good.
For Houston, it has been good. You have grown and you have prospered. You have not been afraid to venture or to build. You have built on the banks of these bayous one of the great cities of America.
You have accepted change and you have made it work for you. You have had the leadership of progressive and prudent newspapers, like the Post and the Chronicle.
This is the work that we are trying to do in the family of nations, like you have been doing here in Houston in the community of the Nation; like our very able and effective Governor has been trying to do in the great State of Texas. And there is no finer Governor in the Nation than John Connally.
And this is the work in the Nation that your President has before him, and this is the meaning of this election.
I have said, as plainly as I know how, what I hope for America, what I hope for you and your family and for generations yet unborn.
And now on this night among friends, so many of them who I see here, who have stood by me, by my side, all through the years, I want to tell you again my hope for America. I want to tell you again my pledge for the Nation.
First, I pledge my total commitment to try to preserve peace while protecting freedom. I want to reduce the threat of nuclear war; to maintain Presidential control over all of our nuclear weapons; to strengthen in every way we can our alliances with other nations; and to advance the cause of freedom all around the world.
Second, I pledge you that we will continue to be the mightiest nation in all the world, stronger in military might than all the nations of all the world combined. But we will always use our power responsibly.
Third, I pledge to work to keep our Nation's prosperity growing and to build the strength of our free enterprise system.
Fourth, I pledge a war on waste in Government--wherever it exists.
Fifth, I pledge to keep your Government frugal and prudent with the people's money. We will get a dollar's value for every dollar spent.
Sixth, I pledge a compassionate Government, one that seeks to abolish poverty, that fights disease and ignorance, and brings to older citizens new hope and increased dignity.
Seventh, I pledge that the constitutional rights of every citizen will be protected, and law and order will be maintained.
Eighth, I pledge to do all in my power to meet our Nation's growing education needs so that every boy and girl in America can receive all the education that they can use.
Ninth, I pledge to conserve our resources, to protect the air and the water from pollution, to make sure that our children and their children will not be robbed of nature's beauty and nature's bounty.
And finally, and the thing I would like to see happen so much here in Texas, and it can happen here, and I believe it will happen here, and I pray that it does happen here, I pledge to work as President of all the people in a land that knows no South, no North, no East, and no West. I hope that somehow we can learn to love thy neighbor as thyself. I hope that somehow we can refrain from speaking badly of our fellow men.
Our work after this election is going to be to heal the wounds of the campaign, and to try to rebuild the unity of all the people of America. We cannot endure in bitterness. The greatness of this great country rests on our being a united people--the United States of America.
With trust in God, let this Nation take fresh strength in renewed hope--and let this land and all who love it move forward, move forward as you have moved in Houston-one people, one Nation, with liberty and justice for all.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 5:30 p.m. in the parking lot of Musical Hall in Houston, Tex. In his opening words he referred to Mayor Louis Welch of Houston and Senator Ralph Yarborough and Representatives Albert Thomas, Bob Casey, Jack Brooks, and Clark W. Thompson, all of Texas. Later he referred to Representative Joe R. Pool of Texas.
The text of remarks of Mrs. Johnson and daughters Lynda and Luci, who spoke briefly, was also released.