Lyndon B. Johnson
November 26, 1966

Memorandum on Appointing a Task Force To Study the Role of Educational Television in the Less-Developed Countries
Memorandum to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Director, United States Information Agency, the Administrator, Agency for International Development, and the Director, Peace Corps
During my recent trip to the Far East, I visited the educational television station in Pago Pago, American Samoa, and saw how television is being used to improve the level of learning in elementary and secondary schools.
I believe that educational television can play a vital role in assisting less-developed countries in their educational effort. These stations can be used for adult education and information programs during evening hours. Community leaders can use these channels for discussion of important public issues.
For these reasons, I am appointing a Task Force with the following assignment:
1. Assess the value of educational television broadcasting for primary and secondary schools in less-developed countries.
2. Report on plans being made for educational television outside the United States and how the United States may participate most effectively in this effort.
3. Advise whether AID education programs and other foreign assistance can be better concentrated on this effort within their present limits.
Representatives of the Agency for International Development, the Department of State, U.S. Information Agency, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, and the Peace Corps are designated as members of the Task Force. Leonard H. Marks, Director of the U.S. Information Agency, is to act as Chairman of the Task Force and Douglass Cater of my staff as liaison with the various departments or governmental agencies involved.
This Task Force should commence its work immediately and submit a preliminary report within 90 days and a final report on or before July 1, 1967.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The memorandum was released at Austin, Texas.