Lyndon B. Johnson
November 29, 1965

Message to the White House Conference on International Cooperation.
I HAVE CALLED this conference for one reason: I am determined that the United States shall actively engage its best minds and boldest spirits in the quest for a new order of world cooperation.
This Nation recognizes that international cooperation is not merely a lofty ideal. It is a fact of life, a necessity of our age.
The General Assembly of the United Nations has designated this year International Cooperation Year, and by proclamation of its President and resolution of its Congress, the United States rededicated itself in 1965 to the ideal and practice of international cooperation.
Throughout its history, by word and deed, this Nation has always demonstrated its understanding of the wisdom of cooperative efforts to solve world problems. And we know that a great nation remains great because it remembers that it can always do better.
I believe this conference will show us specific ways to do better.
I have directed the agencies of our Government to participate in your deliberations--and to study your recommendations with a view to immediate action. Together we seek
--new ways to raise the world's millions up from poverty;
--new policies to conserve and develop the world's resources;
--new methods to rid the world of destructive disease;
--new means to increase commerce between nations;
--new safeguards against the overriding danger of war;

--new avenues to world peace.
This conference is a town meeting of leaders of the Nation. Its purpose is peace and cooperation.
Let us raise our sights to the limits of this goal.
And let us free our imaginations to the tireless pursuit of this high ideal.
Note: The President's message was read before the conference by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey on November 29 at 9:30 a.m. In his message the President referred to Proclamation 3620 of October 2, 1964, designating 1965 as International Cooperation Year (29 F.R. 13627; 3 CFR, 1964 Supp., p. 76); and to Senate Concurrent Resolution 36, agreed to June 22, 1965, providing for the White House Conference on International Cooperation (79 Stat. 1429).
The conference was held in Washington November 29-December 1, 1965.
The text of the message was released at Austin, Tex.