Lyndon B. Johnson
November 01, 1967

Joint Statement Following Discussions With King Mahendra of Nepal.
AT THE invitation of President and Mrs. Johnson, King Mahendra and Queen Ratna of Nepal are paying a State visit to the United States of America beginning November 1, 1967. The Crown Prince, who is studying in the United States, joined Their Majesties during this State visit. Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Kirti Nidhi Bista is accompanying Their Majesties. On their completion of the Washington portion of the visit, during which they have met various members of the United States Government, Their Majesties are traveling to various points of interest in the United States before departing for Nepal on December 3.
The visit afforded King Mahendra and President Johnson an opportunity to become acquainted with each other and to discuss matters of mutual interest and concern. The personal rapport and mutual esteem stemming from their conversations enabled them to discuss these matters with the frankness and friendship which characterize the relations between the United States and Nepal.
The King explained to the President the efforts made in Nepal to secure a better standard of living for the people under the Panchayat system and the measure of success achieved in this direction. President Johnson was impressed with the progress made in Nepal under His Majesty's leadership and praised Nepal's emphasis on increasing agricultural production and the increased self-help measures taken by Nepal. King Mahendra explained that Nepal hoped to have achieved an increase of fifteen percent in its agricultural production by the end of the current five-year plan in 1970. President Johnson assured His Majesty of the continuing deep interest of the United States Government and people in supporting Nepal's efforts to reach its goals. King Mahendra thanked the President for the important role being played by the United States for achieving these high purposes.
King Mahendra and President Johnson discussed the efforts which both the Governments have been making to ease world tensions. It was agreed that the strong support of both countries for the United Nations would not slacken. The King explained that the policy of peaceful co-existence and nonalignment had a continuing validity for Nepal at a time when there were increased tensions in the region itself. The President expressed his understanding of Nepal's efforts to reduce tensions. In affirming their desire for a world in which the arms race could be slowed and in which general and complete disarmament could be achieved under safeguards, President Johnson and King Mahendra expressed their earnest hope that a non-proliferation treaty would soon be concluded. They reasserted their unwavering support for a world of law and order and one in which international obligations and non-interference in the internal affairs of a country are solemnly respected.
King Mahendra and President Johnson discussed other problems facing the world today. They reviewed the situation in Viet Nam, stating their respective views, and agreed that the problem of Viet Nam could be solved in accordance with the Geneva Agreement of 1954. They expressed the hope that a lasting and honorable peace would soon be restored to Viet Nam. With respect to the Middle East, it was agreed that both Governments should continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to evolve a just and durable peace for the Middle East which would be acceptable to all the peoples affected by the recent hostilities there.
President Johnson and King Mahendra agreed that their friendly exchange of views, reflecting the mutual respect and equality of the two nations, had reinforced the already strong bonds of friendship which have characterized Nepalese-American relations since their inception in 1947 and made more meaningful their common quest for peace, justice, and progress.
In taking leave of President Johnson, King Mahendra expressed his thanks for the warm and friendly reception accorded him. King Mahendra extended a cordial invitation to President Johnson and Mrs. Johnson to visit Nepal. The President expressed his gratitude for the invitation and his hope that he and Mrs. Johnson could visit Nepal.