Lyndon B. Johnson
October 02, 1965

Statement by the President Making Public a Joint Report on Natural Beauty in America.
I AM TODAY releasing the results of the first 8 months of the Federal Government's efforts to preserve and improve the beauty of America. These efforts are of particular concern to me, because they will determine the kind of America my daughters--and all the children of America--will inherit.
Last February I sent to the Congress a message on natural beauty. I pointed out, as emphatically as I knew how, the threat of eventual blight to our God-given heritage of natural beauty.
In that message I called specific attention to the fact that our growing population is swallowing up areas of natural beauty with its demand for living space.
I noted with concern that the increasing tempo of urbanization is already depriving many Americans of the opportunity to live in decent surroundings.
I said that a new conservation would be required to deal with these new problems if we are to protect the countryside, save it from destruction, and restore what has been destroyed.
And I also said that this conservation must be not just the classic conservation of protection and development, but a creative conservation of restoration and innovation.
That message was only one of several instances in which I have attempted to convey my interest in preserving and renovating our heritage of beauty.
I spoke of my concern in the State of the Union Message.
I reiterated my concern at the White House Conference on Natural Beauty.
I have since reemphasized it in other messages, in speeches, and in great detail in much of my correspondence.
My administration has made a number of proposals to bring the full resources of this Government to bear on the problem of dwindling beauty.
I am pleased to issue the first fruits of these proposals--a report from the Secretaries of Interior; Agriculture; Commerce; Health, Education, and Welfare; the Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity; and the Administrator of the Housing and Home Finance Agency.
This report summarizes the major efforts of the Federal Government to lead the way in keeping America beautiful. It is an encouraging report because it indicates that concrete progress is being made.
Among other things, it reflects the plans to make this Capital the Nation's showcase.
It outlines what is being done to beautify locations that range from such diverse areas as New York City to the great open spaces of the West.
It indicates in strong fashion that research and training are important tools to be used in giving natural beauty a foothold in both urban and rural environments.
It sums up what we have done thus far to promote natural beauty in the countryside, to retain and improve our scenic and historic sites, and to preserve our wildlife.
It notes the action we have taken to offer improved outdoor recreation to more of our people.
It details our activities to improve our water and waterways as useful and yet beautiful natural resources, and our plans for controlling pollution of streams and rivers.
It points up what we have done and what we intend to do to make our vast network of highways not only useful but beautiful.

There is much more.
This report reflects action that ranges from schools and classrooms to local neighborhood projects, from the disposal of refuse and waste products to the use of trash and garbage as fuels for operating desalting plants.
And yet it is only a beginning. It is a first step.
I have asked those who prepared this report to continue to report to me, on a regular basis, the progress which they have made in this all-important area. These reports will be available as they are made.
But I want you to know that this is more than just a report on action taken and action contemplated.

It is also a request for help.
The task of creating a more beautiful America, of making it a more pleasant place in which to live, is not and cannot be the job of the Federal Government alone. We must have the enthusiasm, the concern, and the cooperation of every level of government-States, counties, cities, and precincts.
I believe that the American people share our feelings. I believe that they want a beautiful country. And I believe that they will respond to the challenge which we have set--to make this the most beautiful nation on earth.
Note: The text of the report is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 1, P. 357).
For the President's message to Congress of February 8, 1965, on the conservation and restoration of natural beauty, see Item 54.
For the annual message to Congress on the State of the Union, see Item a.
For the President's remarks to the delegates to the White House Conference on Natural Beauty, see Item 277.