Lyndon B. Johnson
October 15, 1964

Remarks to a Group Outside Madison Square Garden.
BEFORE I get going on my long, hour speech, I want to introduce to you two of my favorite women--my wife and the wife of the next Democratic Senator from New York, Ethel Kennedy.
We have had a little session inside, and I don't know whether you heard us or not, but there is not much that I can add to what I said except this: that I think we are both down here at this late hour tonight for the same reason. I know why I am here, and I am going to be presumptuous enough to imagine why you are here.
I am here because I care about people and I think that is why you are here, too. You believe in peace in the world. You would rather talk than fight, and so would I.
You believe in prosperity at home, you believe that every man and woman that wants a job and who is willing to work ought to have a job, and so do I.
You believe in social security, and so do I.
You believe in collective bargaining, and so do I. You fought to help abolish the sweatshop, and so did I.
You believe that peace should be our mission and prosperity should be our program, and so do I.
As we look back at Lincoln, Wilson, Roosevelt, and Kennedy, and Lehman and Al Smith and the great leaders of this State, we see what we can do if we will only unite together. Now, come November 3d, you are going to have a chance to help us unite. You can't do it by sitting home in your rocking chair. You have to get up early that morning and work until late that night and send down to Washington a man who will support the programs of Roosevelt, Kennedy, and Johnson--Bob Kennedy. You have to send some Democratic Congressmen to help him.
After you get through, if you are not too tired, you can put in a lick or two for Hubert Humphrey and me.
Note: The President spoke at 9:13 p.m. outside Madison Square Garden in New York City. In his opening remarks he referred to Mrs. Robert F. Kennedy, wife of the Democratic candidate for U.S. Senator from New York.