Lyndon B. Johnson
October 26, 1965

Statement by the President in Connection With the Award of a Presidential Unit Citation to the 42d Ranger Battalion, Republic of Viet-Nam.
THE HEROIC action of the 42d Ranger Battalion of the Republic of Viet-Nam affords the world still another example of the courage and steadfast determination with which a brave people struggles to preserve its freedom.
Few nations have been subjected to such a ruthless and relentless assault on their basic liberty; none have fought more heroically in defense of that liberty than the people of South Viet-Nam.
The Republic of Viet-Nam is today on the frontier of freedom--a frontier which exists wherever force and violence attempt to subvert a nation's independence. The undaunted courage and indomitable spirit of the Vietnamese 42d Ranger Battalion, which we honor by this citation, strengthens our faith in the ultimate triumph of the cause of freedom.
PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION TO THE 42d BATTALION OF THE REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM ARMED FORCES By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States I have today awarded
THE PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION

TO THE 42d RANGER BATTALION REPUBLIC OF VIET-NAM ARMED FORCES FOR EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM The 42d Ranger Battalion is cited for extraordinary heroism in connection with military operations against a hostile force in Bac Lieu Province, Vietnam on 13 May 1965. On this date the 42d Ranger Battalion was committed as part of a larger force in operation Dan Chi 135, a search and destroy operation against a suspected Viet Cong Battalion. At 1210 hours elements of the Battalion were Heli-lifted into battle and made immediate contact with the fanatic forces of the provincial battalion of Soc Trang, an elite Viet Cong unit, which occupied well prepared defensive fortifications. With undaunted courage and steadfast determination elements of the 42d Ranger Battalion immediately closed with the enemy in a fierce assault which overran a flank of the enemy position. As the Battalion continued its attack, heavy flanking fire was received from the right. The Battalion immediately redisposed to hold in the direction of attack while taking aggressive action to eliminate the threat to the flank and rear. A courageous attempt to assault across the open field was halted by withering grazing fire. Repeated attempts by the attacking elements using fire and short rounds resulted in only slight advance against the fanatically defending insurgent forces. At 1335 hours another company of the Battalion was committed to assist in destroying the enemy. Although this unit also met with murderous fire from enemy machine guns which swept the open fields, steady pressure was maintained on the defending Viet Cong. With undaunted courage and indomitable fighting spirit, continuous fire and movement was used to steadily close on the enemy position. At 1735 hours the reserve element of the 42d Ranger Battalion was committed in a coordinated Battalion assault to destroy the enemy.
The assault by this unit was so resolute that the aggressor was routed from his emplacement and the flank was rolled up. The shock action and dogged determination of this unit destroyed the enemy's will to fight. Those enemy not killed or wounded fled the scene of battle. The gallant actions and victory of the 42d Ranger Battalion cost the lives of 11 of its members, with 22 others wounded in action. This highly effective combat operation was an eminent success and resulted in a body count of 114 insurgents killed, and a total of 59 VC weapons captured, for a favorable ten to one kill ratio. The actions of the 42d Ranger Battalion reflect conspicuous gallantry and extraordinary heroism in keeping with the finest traditions of the military service, and reflect great credit on the Republic of Viet-Nam.
Note: The statement and text of the citation were released at Austin, Tex.