Lyndon B. Johnson
October 26, 1964

Message to President Kaunda on the Occasion of the Independence of Zambia.
Dear Mr. President:
I extend to you and, through you, to the people and Government of Zambia the sincere best wishes of the American people and Government. We rejoice that Zambia has become free and now joins the other independent states of Africa in seeking a better life for its people.
During the past ten years the United States has warmly and sincerely welcomed many African states into the community of nations. As we welcome Zambia to this community and extend our congratulations to the people of Zambia, we wish to express our personal admiration to you, Mr. President, for the vital role you played during the recent years of preparation for this joyous occasion.
We especially admire your success in achieving mutual cooperation and understanding among the different racial elements in Zambia. We sincerely hope that this achievement will be taken as a lesson and example by the entire world. Our interest in your example is greatly heightened by our own efforts to eliminate racial discrimination in the United States.
The American nation seeks constantly to foster the development of free nations cooperating for their mutual benefit. We encourage the building of world and regional institutions for joint action and cooperation. We seek the elimination of violence and aggression of any sort in relations among nations, and we support the economic and social development of each nation in the interest of the development of all nations. We believe that this community of free nations can fully achieve the universal goals expressed in the United Nations Charter only when all governments are based on the consent of the governed. We know that Zambia shares these objectives with us. We look forward to close cooperation with you and your Government in pursuing these mutual objectives in the councils of the world and in our relations with each other.
Zambia's independence will permit us to strengthen the ties of friendship and coo operation which have been built up between Zambians and Americans over many years.
With every possible good wish for the future success and well-being of Zambia and its people, I extend personally to you and to your Government my warmest congratulations for all that you have accomplished thus far. I pledge my friendship and that of my people and country in the years ahead.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[His Excellency Kenneth D. Kaunda, President of the Republic of Zambia, Lusaka]
Note: The message was delivered to President Kaunda, whose country became independent on October 24, by Charles W. Engelhard, Personal Representative of the President with the rank of Special Ambassador.