Lyndon B. Johnson
October 02, 1966

Statement by the President on the Strike Threat at General Electric.
FOR THE past 2 months, the General Electric Company and the International Union of Electrical Workers and other unions have been engaged in negotiations for a new contract. The Government's mediation service has been made available to support and encourage their efforts to reach a fair and just agreement. I have just been informed that the parties have been unable to reach agreement.
This afternoon, as a result, the threat of a strike of 125,000 workers hangs over the Nation.
The prospect of any large strike is cause for concern. But in the case of General Electric and the IUE and the other unions involved here, the threat of a strike takes on a particularly profound meaning for the American people, and for our men in the jungles and rice paddies in Vietnam.
General Electric is a leading producer and developer of a wide range of munitions, electronic equipment, and missiles for the Armed Forces. It makes powerplants for our ships and submarines. It supplies the engines for the F-4 "Phantom" fighter and for our helicopters, machine-guns for many of our combat aircraft, and battlefield radar equipment.
Our men in Vietnam need these planes, these helicopters, these weapons. They are essential to their very lives. And they need them now--not next week or next month.
In view of the importance and urgency of this situation, I am requesting the parties to continue operations for 2 weeks. During this period I am asking the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Secretary of Labor in cooperation with the Director of the Federal Conciliation and Mediation Service, Mr. William Simkin, to meet with the parties to explore every further possibility of reaching a settlement in this case, which will recognize all of the interests involved.
The soldier in Vietnam must discharge his responsibilities every day with a heroism and determination that are the daily hallmarks of his life. In that same spirit, I ask the parties to this dispute to meet their responsibilities and reach a just agreement at the earliest possible moment.
Note: For the President's later action, see the cable to the Acting Attorney General directing him to seek an injunction in the General Electric Co. labor dispute (Item 535).