Lyndon B. Johnson
October 31, 1967

Presidential Unit Citation Awarded to the 7th Airborne Battalion, Airborne Division, Army of the Republic of Vietnam.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States takes pleasure in presenting the
PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION TO 17TH AIRBORNE BATTALION AIRBORNE DIVISION
ARMY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
for service as set forth in the following
CITATION:
For heroism in connection with military operations against North Vietnamese Army forces in Quang Ngai Province, during the period 14 February to 22 February 1967. An enemy regiment, encircled by a tri-nation operation, launched a full-scale, predawn attack against the 7th Airborne Battalion on 19 February 1967, under weather conditions which prevented U.S. tactical air support. The 7th Airborne Battalion, in a matter of a few hours, was heavily engaged in repelling human-wave attacks from three sides in hand-to-hand combat. In spite of heavy casualties after a five-hour battle, the gallant paratroopers continued to counterattack deeper and deeper into the attacking force, alternately returning to their lines, as weather conditions permitted elements of fighter aircraft to make passes, and using captured weapons in their defense. With over 200 enemy dead lying on the 7th Airborne Battalion perimeter, the attackers continued to assault in an attempt to break through the hard-pressed Airborne lines. Following an emergency resupply by U.S. Marine Corps pilots, the South Vietnamese paratroopers successfully held their positions for another seven hours during determined enemy attacks. At the opportune time, the Airborne soldiers valiantly counterattacked in three directions from their positions, routed the enemy, killed many of the fleeing members of the North Vietnamese Army regiment, and captured huge quantities of weapons and equipment. Their determination was clearly evident, as individual soldiers refused to give ground to the enemy, and noncommissioned officers quickly took command where necessary. The gallantry and fighting ability of the 7th Airborne Battalion in the face of exceptionally strong enemy opposition, reflect great credit upon the Battalion and the Army of the Republic of Vietnam.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON