Lyndon B. Johnson
October 05, 1967

Statement by the President Following the Return of a Mission To Survey the Scientific and Technological Assets and Needs of the Republic of China.
I AM delighted with the cordial reception given Dr. Hornig and his colleagues by the Chinese Government and by the interest shown in their mission. American experience in expanding industry should be a valuable resource to draw upon in strengthening science and technology as a basis for social and economic progress in Taiwan. I look forward to new cooperative efforts which will make use of American experience in improving higher education, industrial research, and business management.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House release summarizing a report to the President by Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, and the team of experts who had accompanied him to Taiwan in mid-September 1967. The mission had been arranged by President Johnson the previous May during the visit of Vice President C. K. Yen of the Republic of China.
The release noted that Dr. Hornig and the members of his party had commented favorably on the growth of industry and agriculture in Talwan and on the climate the Chinese Government had created for foreign investment. They recommended a continuation of U.S. cooperation in developing the industrial and educational capacity of the country.
The release listed the members of Dr. Hornig's team as follows: Dr. James B. Fisk, president, Bell Telephone Laboratories, Murray Hill, N.J.; Dr. Bruce S. Old, senior vice president, A. D. Little Inc., Cambridge, Mass.; Dr. Albert H. Moseman, associate, Agricultural Development Council, New York, N.Y.; Dr. Raymond Bowers, professor of physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y.; and Daniel F. Margolies, Foreign Service officer, presently on the staff of the Office of Science and Technology.
The text of the release is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 3, P. 1389).