Lyndon B. Johnson
September 23, 1968

Presidential Unit Citation Awarded Units of the 3d Brigade, 4th Infantry Division, USA.
BY VIRTUE of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States I have today awarded
THE PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION (ARMY) FOR EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM
TO THE FOLLOWING UNITS OF 3D BRIGADE, 4TH INFANTRY DIVISION:
BRIGADE COMMAND AND CONTROL PARTY
AT FSB GOLD 3D BATTALION (LESS COMPANY C), 22D INFANTRY 2D BATTALION (LESS COMPANY B), 34TH ARMOR 2D BATTALION, 77TH ARTILLERY 2D BATTALION, 22D INFANTRY 2D BATTALION, 12TH INFANTRY
The 3d Brigade, 4th Infantry Division and the attached and assigned units distinguished themselves by extraordinary heroism while engaged in military operations on 21 March 1967 in Suoi Tre, Republic of Vietnam. During the early morning hours the Viet Cong 272d Main Force Regiment, reinforced, launched a massive and determined ground attack and overran elements of the 3d Battalion, 22d Infantry, and 2d Battalion, 77th Artillery, located at Fire Support Base Gold near Suoi Tre, Republic of Vietnam. As the enemy penetrated the perimeter, the American troops set up an interim perimeter and continued to fire on the enemy. When the Viet Cong directed anti-tank fire upon the artillery positions, heroic gun crews repaired their damaged guns and, at several points, fired directly into the advancing enemy. While the battle continued to rage and grow in intensity, the Brigade Commander was directing the 2d Battalion of the 12th Infantry, the 22d Infantry (Mechanized), and the 34th Armor, to the besieged fire support base. At the same time, the support and service elements of the brigade began a furious aerial resupply of ammunition and medical supplies from the brigade rear base camp at Dau Tieng. As the 2d Battalion, 12th Infantry, began its overland move to the fire support base, a heavy concentration of enemy mortar fire was directed upon their positions. Concurrently, mechanized and armor elements began moving across the Suoi Samat River at a ford which had only recently been located and which previously had been thought impassable. The mechanized unit, followed by the armor battalion, drove into the western sector of the engaged perimeter passing through engaged elements of the 2d Battalion, 12th Infantry. Striking the Viet Gong on the flank, the 2d Battalion, 22d Infantry, smashed through the enemy with such intensity and ferocity that the enemy attack faltered and broke. As the fleeing and now shattered enemy force retreated to the northeast, the 2d Battalion, 34th Armor swept the position destroying large numbers of Viet Cong. Throughout the battle, fighters of the United States Air Force, directed by the brigade's forward air controllers, provided close support to the fire support base and hammered enemy concentrations outside the perimeter. As the Forward Air Controller aircraft dived through heavy anti-aircraft fire to mark enemy positions, the plane was hit by ground fire, and crashed. After securing the fire support base, a sweep of the area was conducted, revealing a total of 647 Viet Cong bodies and 10 enemy captured. It is estimated that an additional 200 enemy were killed as a result of the aerial and artillery bombardments. Friendly casualties were extremely light, resulting in only 33 killed and 187 wounded. Through their fortitude and determination, the personnel of the 3d Brigade, 4th Infantry Division, and attached units were able in great measure to cripple a large Viet Cong force. Their devotion to duty and extraordinary heroism reflect distinct credit upon themselves and the Armed Forces of the United States.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The citation was released at San Antonio, Texas.