Lyndon B. Johnson
September 18, 1967

Remarks at "Employer of the Year" Ceremony Honoring Outstanding Employers of the Handicapped.
Secretary Wirtz, Chairman Macy, Mr. Ochel, Mr. Payne, ladies and gentlemen:
Unlike Robert Merrill, I have never sung at the Metropolitan Opera. And unlike Frank Howard, I cannot play baseball with the Washington Senators.
As a matter of fact, there are a few other things I cannot do these days with the Senators. Unlike my Science Adviser, Dr. Hornig, I cannot do equations with three unknowns or even with two unknowns.
But with all that, I have never considered myself a handicapped person. And I think that touches upon the main point of our gathering here in the Cabinet Room for this ceremony today.
Human beings have varying degrees of ability. Some can hit home runs. Some can sing in the opera. Some, like Thomas Edison, can produce great inventions--even though Edison himself was deaf. Some, like Sarah Bernhardt, can be great actresses--even though Sarah Bernhardt was an amputee.
What counts in life is not what people can't do. What really counts is what people Can do.
We are finding out in America these days the so-called handicapped people can do far more than we ever dreamed before was possible. They can do their jobs as well or do them better than many so-called normal workers.
Two gentlemen, whom I have just met, are receiving awards today. They know that for sure. The companies they work for--the Wichita Division of Boeing Aircraft Company and the International Optical Company-have shown great leadership in our country in employing the handicapped.
This has worked to the companies' benefit as well as to the benefit and the dignity of their employees. I am very grateful to all who have made this policy possible.
They knew, as many in Government today are learning, that what we call health is a broad concept that goes far beyond mere survival to a stated number of years. In Government and out, our aim is not only to add years to life, but to add life to years.
The Committee on Employment of the Handicapped is doing that. Men like Mr. Ochel and Mr. Payne are doing that. On our country's behalf to the Chairman of the Committee, to the Cabinet officers concerned, to the companies involved, and particularly to the individuals who demonstrated that they are "can do" people--I express the gratitude of an interested Nation and the people who serve in it for the examples that you have set.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 1:08 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to W. Willard Wirtz, Secretary of Labor, John W. Macy, Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, Ernest A. Ochel, General Manager of the Wichita Division, Boeing Co., and John W. Payne, Executive Vice President, International Optical Co., Dallas, who accepted the awards on behalf of their firms.
A White House announcement concerning the awards is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 3, P. 1313).