Lyndon B. Johnson
September 19, 1967

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the President of Italy.
PRESIDENT JOHNSON and President Saragat had two conversations at the White House on September 18 and 19. Secretary of State Rusk and Foreign Minister Fanfani were present on both occasions.
The two Presidents had a broad and thorough exchange of views on the international situation. There was also a review of issues of bilateral concern, with a view to strengthening further the close relations between the two countries in accordance with the long-standing ties of friendship and alliance which exist between Italy and the United States.
It was agreed that the common goal of both nations is the maintenance and the strengthening of peace. The two Presidents reaffirmed their confidence in the essential role played by the UN in achieving that objective.
There was complete agreement on the importance the North Atlantic Alliance, which from its inception has served both as an instrument of defense and as a vehicle for progress, continues to have for the security of its members and for world peace. By reinforcing international stability, it contributes to mutual understanding and confidence among peoples. It was also agreed that security and peace in the Atlantic area are based on a partnership between Western Europe and North America, founded on equality of rights and duties and on a balanced development which may be furthered through ever closer technological cooperation. The two nations share a common desire to create an atmosphere of cooperation and to bring about the relaxation of tensions among all the nations of the European continent.
The prospects for broadening the foundations of peace were examined. In this connection, it was agreed that a treaty to limit the dissemination of nuclear weapons, which takes into account the legitimate interests of all countries concerned would contribute to that end.
It was agreed that the two countries, deeply concerned by recent events in the Middle East, share a particular interest in the reestablishment of peace and stability in that area. With respect to Southeast Asia, confidence was expressed that an equitable settlement of the present conflict will be reached on the basis of freedom so as to strengthen the fabric of peace everywhere.
The two Presidents welcomed the recent agreements reached in London on international monetary liquidity and agreed on the importance of achieving agreement on this matter at the meeting of the International Monetary Fund at Rio de Janeiro later this month. They expressed satisfaction at the successful conclusion of the Kennedy Round trade negotiations, and underlined the great importance which they attach to assisting the developing nations in obtaining a higher standard of living and greater economic growth.
The two Presidents agreed on the great importance of these consultations among close allies, which contribute to the strengthening of understanding and cooperation between the two countries, and thus to the achievement of the common objectives of progress and peace for all mankind.