Lyndon B. Johnson
September 03, 1965

Letters to Participants in the Dominican Republic Negotiations.
Dear Dr. Mora:
I extend to you the warmest thanks for your extraordinary efforts for peace in the Dominican Republic in the last four months. Your energetic and imaginative work in Santo Domingo helped to lay the basis for the later efforts of your colleagues in the OAS Committee, and your persistent devotion to peace and to democratic institutions has been a continuous force for good, in the best tradition of the Americas.
I send thanks also, through you, to the whole Organization of American States, which you serve so ably as Secretary General. The OAS has met a major challenge, and it has been strengthened by the success of its patient effort for peace.

With warm personal regards

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Dr. Jose Mora, Secretary General, Organization of American States, Pan American Union, Washington 6, D.C.]
Dear Ellsworth:
This brings my warmest thanks and congratulations on your superb performance in Santo Domingo. Your patience and skill and determination have once again been of the greatest value to your country--and a source of great strength for me. I am afraid you have put yourself right in line for more impossible assignments like this last one, but you must be sure to get a well-earned rest first.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

[Hon. Ellsworth Bunker, U.S. Representative to the Council of the Organization of American States, Department of State, Washington, D.C.]
Dear Tap:
At this moment of hope, I want to send you a word of thanks for all that you have done in the hard months since April. I know that this has been a most testing time for you, and you must be in no doubt that you have the full confidence of your Government, and our lasting gratitude for your prompt, courageous and correct advice at the critical moment last April.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Hon. W. Tapley Bennett, Jr., American Ambassador, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic]
Note: Letters from Dr. Mora, Mr. Bunker, and Mr. Bennett, replying to the President's letters, were made public by the White House on September 4 (I Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 209),
See also Items 472, 473,484.