Lyndon B. Johnson
September 04, 1964

Statement by the President on the North Pacific Fisheries Negotiations.
THE THIRD round of negotiations with Canada and Japan on North Pacific fisheries problems is scheduled to begin in Ottawa on September 9' I have just received a report on the issues involved from Ambassador Benjamin A. Smith II, who will head the United States delegation in these negotiations. The major problem with which the negotiations will deal is the revision of the existing international arrangements for the conservation and rational utilization of the fishery resources in the North Pacific Ocean.
Two earlier rounds of negotiations were held in Washington and Tokyo last year. They made substantial progress toward full agreement. I hope the negotiations can be completed during the new round of discussions.
The primary objective of the United States in these negotiations is to protect the interests of Alaska and the Pacific Northwest in the North Pacific fisheries, which consist principally of salmon and halibut. The economy of these regions is heavily dependent upon the U.S. fisheries supported by these resources.
The interests of the United States in these fishery stocks have been advanced by the International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean. Basic to that convention is the concept that in special situations, such as those exemplified by the North American salmon and halibut fisheries, where the countries participating in the fisheries have built up and maintained the resources through major research and regulatory programs, other countries should exercise restraints on their fishing of the type provided for in that convention.
This concept provides the incentives necessary to the establishment and continuation of the conservation measures essential to the attainment, both now and in the future, of the maximum harvest of food for mankind. This will insure the conservation of important marine resources and prevent irreparable damage to them through overexploitation. This is in the common interest of Japan, Canada, and the United States.
Over the years we have made major contributions to the restoration and maintenance of the salmon and halibut fisheries. For this reason, we have a special interest in them. We are determined to protect that interest, while giving every consideration to the legitimate interests of the other parties to the convention. I am confident that Ambassador Smith, who was the United States representative during the earlier discussions, will effectively present our point of view.
I urge that the three delegations work out a solution that will permit the conservation of these resources for future generations, taking into account the unique circumstances surrounding the convention and the interests of all parties to it.
Note: The International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean is published with related papers in "United States Treaties and Other International Agreements" (4 UST (pt. r ) 380, TIAS 2786; 14 UST (pt. 1) 953, TIAS 5385).