William J. Clinton
August 04, 1993

Executive Order 12857—Budget Control
By the authority vested in me as President of the United States by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Purpose. The purpose of this order is to create a mechanism to monitor total costs of direct spending programs, and, in the event that actual or projected costs exceed targeted levels, to require that the budget address adjustments in direct spending.
Sec. 2. Establishment of Direct Spending Targets.
Sec. 4. Special Direct Spending Message by President.
(a) Trigger. In the event that the information submitted under Section 3 indicates—
(3) Any proposed legislative change under paragraph (2) to reduce outlays may include reductions in direct spending or in the discretionary spending limits under section 601 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
Sec. 5. Proposed Special Direct Spending Resolution. If the President recommends reductions consistent with subsection 4 (b)(2)(A) or (B), the special direct spending message shall include the text of a special direct spending resolution implementing the President’s recommendations through reconciliation directives instructing the appropriate committees of the House of Representatives and Senate to determine and recommend changes in laws within their jurisdictions to reduce outlays or increase revenues by specified amounts. If the President recommends no reductions pursuant to Section 4 (b)(2)(C), the special direct spending message shall include the text of a special resolution concurring in the President’s recommendation of no legislative action.
Sec 6. Adjustments to Direct Spending Targets.
(3) No adjustment shall be made for any program for a fiscal year in which the percentage increase computed under paragraph (2)(A) is less than or equal to zero.
Sec. 7. Relationship to Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act. Recommendations pursuant to Section 4 shall include a provision specifying that reductions in outlays or increases in receipts resulting from that legislation shall not be taken into account for purposes of any budget enforcement procedures under the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
Sec. 8. Estimating Margin. For any fiscal year for which the overage is less than one-half of 1 percent of the direct spending target for that year, the procedures set forth in Section 4 shall not apply.
Sec. 9. Means-Tested Programs. In making recommendations under Section 4, the Director shall seriously consider all other alternatives before proposing reductions in means-tested programs.
Sec. 10. Effective Date. This order shall take effect upon enactment of OBRA. This order shall apply to direct spending targets for fiscal years 1994 through 1997 and shall expire at the end of fiscal year 1997.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

August 4, 1993.