William J. Clinton
August 09, 2000

Executive Order 13165—Creation of the White House Task Force on Drug Use in Sports and Authorization for the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy To Serve as the United States Governments Representative on the Board of the World Anti-Doping Agency
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Office of National Drug Control Reauthorization Act of 1998, (21 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), and in order to develop recommendations for Federal agency actions to address the use of drugs in sports, in particular among young people, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. The use of drugs in sports has reached a level that endangers not just the legitimacy of athletic competition but also the lives and health of athletes—from the elite ranks to youth leagues. The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse issued in 1999 found that in just 1 year’s time the rate of steroid use among young people rose roughly 50 percent among both sexes and across all age groups. It is the policy of my Administration to take the steps needed to help eliminate illicit or otherwise banned drug use and doping in sports at the State, national, and international level.
Sec. 2. Establishment of a White House Task Force on Drug Use in Sports.
(d) To the extent permitted by law and at the request of the Chairs,
agencies shall cooperate with and provide information to the Task Force. Sec. 3. Participation in the World Anti-Doping Agency. (a) As part of my Administration’s efforts to address the problem of drug use in sports, the
United States has played a leading role in the formation of a World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) by the Olympic and sports community and the nations of the world. Through these efforts, the United States has been selected to serve as a governmental representative on the board of the WADA. This order will authorize the Director to serve as the United States Government’s representative on the WADA board.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

August 9, 2000.