William J. Clinton
December 27, 1993

Executive Order 12889—Implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (Public Law 103–182, 107 Stat. 2057) (the NAFTA Implementation Act) and section 302 of title 3, United States Code, and in order to implement the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), it is hereby ordered:
Section 1. Establishment of United States Section of the NAFTA Secretariat.
Pursuant to section 105(a) of the NAFTA Implementation Act, a United States section of the NAFTA Secretariat shall be established within the Department of Commerce and shall carry out the functions set out in that section.
Sec. 2. Acceptance by the President of Panel and Committee Decisions.
Pursuant to subparagraph 516A(g)(7)(B) of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended, 19 U.S.C. 1516a(g)(7)(B), in the event that the provisions of that subparagraph take effect, I accept, as a whole, all decisions of binational panels and extraordinary challenge committees.
Sec. 3. Implementation of Safeguard Provisions for Textile and Apparel Goods. Pursuant to section 201 of the NAFTA Implementation Act, the Committee for the Implementation of Textile Agreements (the Committee) shall take such action as necessary to implement the bilateral safeguard provisions (tariff actions) set out in section 4 of Annex 300–B of the NAFTA. The United States Customs Service shall take such actions to carry out those safeguard provisions as directed by the Secretary of the Treasury, upon the advice and recommendation of the Chairman of the Committee.
Sec. 4. Publication of Proposed Rules regarding Technical Regulations and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures. (a) In accordance with Articles 718 and 909 of the NAFTA, each agency subject to the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. 551 et seq.), shall, in applying section 553 of title 5, United States Code, with respect to any proposed Federal technical regulation or any Federal sanitary or phytosanitary measure of general application, other than a regulation issued pursuant to section 104(a) of the NAFTA Implementation Act, publish or serve notice of such regulation or measure not less than 75 days before the comment due date, except:
Act of 1979, and "technical regulation" shall be defined in accordance with section 473 of the Trade Agreements Act of 1979.
(c) This section supersedes section 1 of Executive Order No. 12662 of
December 31, 1988.

Sec. 5. Government Procurement Procedures. (a) Waiver.

Sec. 7. Judicial Review. This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person.
Sec. 8. Effective Date. This order shall take effect upon the date of entry into force of the NAFTA for the United States.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

December 27, 1993.
Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Department of Defense Department of Education Department of Energy Department of Health and Human Services Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of the Interior Department of Justice Department of Labor Department of State Department of Transportation Department of the Treasury United States Agency for International Development General Services Administration National Aeronautics and Space Administration Department of Veterans Affairs Environmental Protection Agency United States Information Agency National Science Foundation Panama Canal Commission Executive Office of the President Farm Credit Administration National Credit Union Administration Merit Systems Protection Board ACTION Agency United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Office of Thrift Supervision Federal Housing Finance Board National Labor Relations Board National Mediation Board Railroad Retirement Board American Battle Monuments Commission Federal Communications Commission Federal Trade Commission Interstate Commerce Commission Securities and Exchange Commission Office of Personnel Management United States International Trade Commission Export-Import Bank of the United States Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service Selective Service System Smithsonian Institution Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Consumer Product Safety Commission Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Federal Maritime Commission National Transportation Safety Board Nuclear Regulatory Commission Overseas Private Investment Corporation Administrative Conference of the United States Board for International Broadcasting Commission on Civil Rights Commodity Futures Trading Commission Peace Corps National Archives and Records Administration
The Power Marketing Administrations of the Department of Energy Tennessee Valley Authority St. Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation