William J. Clinton
December 04, 2000

Executive Order 13178—Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Coral Reef Ecosystem Reserve
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Marine Sanctuaries Act, (16 U.S.C. 1431 et seq.), and the National Marine Sanctuaries Amendments Act of 2000, Public Law 106-513, and in furtherance of the purposes of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (33 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.), Coastal Zone Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.), Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), Marine Mammal Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 1362 et seq.), Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.), National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act (16 U.S.C. 668dd-ee), and other pertinent statutes, it is ordered as follows:
Section 1. Preamble. The world’s coral reefs—the rain forests of the sea— are in serious decline. These important and sensitive areas of biodiversity warrant special protection. While United States waters contain approximately 3 percent of the world’s coral reefs, approximately 70 percent of U.S. coral reefs are in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. The 3.5 million acres of coral reefs around the remote, mostly uninhabited Northwestern Hawaiian Islands are spectacular and almost undisturbed by humans. The approximately 1,200 mile stretch of coral islands, seamounts, banks, and shoals are unquestionably some of the healthiest and most extensive coral reefs in the United States. In their own right, the spectacular coral reefs and lands provide an amazing geological record of volcanic and erosive powers that have shaped this area. This vast area supports a dynamic reef ecosystem that supports more than 7,000 marine species, of which approximately half are unique to the Hawaiian Island chain. This incredibly diverse ecosystem is home to many species of coral, fish, birds, marine mammals, and other flora and fauna including the endangered Hawaiian monk seal, the threatened green sea turtle, and the endangered leatherback and hawksbill sea turtles. In addition, this area has great cultural significance to Native Hawaiians as well as linkages to early Polynesian culture—making it additionally worthy of protection and understanding. This is truly a unique and special place, a coral reef ecosystem like no place on earth, and a source of pride, inspiration, and satisfaction for all Americans, especially the people of Hawaii. It is fully worthy of our best efforts to preserve a legacy of America’s natural wonders for future generations. Due to the special significance of this area, I have determined that it is in the best interest of our Nation, and of future generations, to provide strong and lasting protection for the coral reef ecosystem of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands.
On May 26, 2000, I directed the Secretaries of Commerce and the Interior, working cooperatively with the State of Hawaii and consulting with the Western Pacific Fishery Management Council, to develop recommendations for a new, coordinated management regime to increase protection of the coral reef ecosystem of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands and provide for sustainable use of the area. Upon consideration of their recommendations and comments received during the public visioning process on this initiative, and based on the statutory authorities set forth above, I am issuing this Executive Order.
Sec. 2. Purpose. The purpose of this Executive Order is to ensure the comprehensive, strong, and lasting protection of the coral reef ecosystem and related marine resources and species (resources) of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands.
Sec. 3. Establishment of Coral Reef Ecosystem Reserve. There is hereby established in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands a coral reef ecosystem reserve to be known as the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Coral Reef Ecosystem Reserve (Reserve). The Reserve shall include submerged lands and waters of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, extending approximately 1,200 nautical miles (nm) long and 100nm wide. The Reserve shall be adjacent to and seaward of the seaward boundaries of the State of Hawaii and the Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge, and shall overlay the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge to the extent that it extends beyond the seaward boundaries of the State of Hawaii. The boundaries of the Reserve are described in section 6 of this order.
Sec. 4. Management Principles. The Secretary of Commerce, or his designee, (hereafter "Secretary") shall, subject to section 10(b) of this order, manage the Reserve in accordance with the following principles:
Sec. 8. Reserve Preservation Areas.
and until the Secretary determines otherwise after adequate public review and comment.
(b) Activities Prohibited Within Reserve Preservation Areas.
Sec. 9. Native Hawaiian Uses. Native Hawaiian noncommercial subsistence, cultural, or religious uses may continue, to the extent consistent with existing law, within the Reserve and Reserve Preservation Areas identified under section 8 of this order. The Secretary shall work with Native Hawaiian interests to identify those areas where such Native Hawaiian uses of the Reserve’s resources may be conducted without injury to the Reserve’s coral reef ecosystem and related marine resources and species, and may revise the areas where such activities may occur after public review and comment, and consideration of any advice and recommendations of the Reserve Council.
Sec. 10. National Wildlife Refuges.
of Hawaii, as provided under section 5(b) of this order, to ensure coordinated protection and management among the Reserve, Refuges, and State, consistent with relevant authorities.
Sec. 11. Administration and Judicial Review.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

December 4, 2000.