William J. Clinton
February 08, 2000

Executive Order 13145—To Prohibit Discrimination in Federal Employment Based on Genetic Information
By the authority vested in me as President of the United States by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is ordered as follows:
Section 1. Nondiscrimination in Federal Employment on the Basis of Protected Genetic Information.
1–101. It is the policy of the Government of the United States to provide equal employment opportunity in Federal employment for all qualified persons and to prohibit discrimination against employees based on protected genetic information, or information about a request for or the receipt of genetic services. This policy of equal opportunity applies to every aspect of Federal employment.
1–102. The head of each Executive department and agency shall extend the policy set forth in section 1–101 to all its employees covered by section 717 of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16).
1–103. Executive departments and agencies shall carry out the provisions of this order to the extent permitted by law and consistent with their statutory and regulatory authorities, and their enforcement mechanisms. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission shall be responsible for coordinating the policy of the Government of the United States to prohibit discrimination against employees in Federal employment based on protected genetic information, or information about a request for or the receipt of genetic services.
Sec. 2. Requirements Applicable to Employing Departments and Agencies.
1–201. Definitions.
1–202. In discharging their responsibilities under this order, departments and agencies shall implement the following nondiscrimination requirements.
(e) The employing department or agency shall not maintain protected genetic information or information about a request for or the receipt of genetic services in general personnel files; such information shall be treated as confidential medical records and kept separate from personnel files.
Sec. 3. Exceptions.
1–301. The following exceptions shall apply to the nondiscrimination requirements set forth in section 1–202.
(1) the employee has provided prior, knowing, voluntary, and written authorization;
(e) This order does not limit the statutory authority of a Federal department or agency to:
Sec. 4. Miscellaneous.
1–401. The head of each department and agency shall take appropriate
action to disseminate this policy and, to this end, shall designate a high
level official responsible for carrying out its responsibilities under this order.
1–402. Nothing in this order shall be construed to:
1–403. This order clarifies and makes uniform Administration policy and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its officers or employees, or any other person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 8, 2000.