William J. Clinton
January 08, 1994

Memorandum on Assistance to the States of the Former Soviet Union
Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense
Subject:Transfer of Funds for Assistance for the New Independent States (NIS) of the Former Soviet Union
Pursuant to the Supplemental Appropriations for the NIS of the Former Soviet Union Act, 1993 (Title VI of Public Law 103-87) (the "Act"), I hereby determine that programs described in Section 560 of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1994 (Titles I-V of Public Law 103-87) and programs described in Section 498 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (Public Law 87-195), will increase the national security of the United States.
The political and economic transformation of the NIS of the former Soviet Union into peaceful market-oriented democracies will directly reduce the security threat to the United States and lead to substantial savings in the cost of the defense of the United States. The above-mentioned programs facilitate this transformation, thereby making a critical contribution to increasing the national security of the United States.
Accordingly, unless I instruct otherwise in the interim, on the thirtieth day following submission to the appropriate Committees of the Congress of the memorandum regarding notification under 10 U.S.C. 2215 for the NIS of the former Soviet Union, you are authorized and directed to exercise your authority under the first two provisos under the heading "Operation and Maintenance, Defense Agencies" in the Act to transfer funds in the amounts and to the accounts detailed in the attachment to this memorandum. Any funds transferred to the Agency for International Development may thereafter, at the direction of the Secretary of State or the Coordinator designated under Section 102 of the FREEDOM Support Act (Public Law 102-511), be allocated or transferred pursuant to the authority of Section 632 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. In the event of such transfer, the implementing agency shall be the agency responsible and accountable for the management, audit and use of such funds.
WILLIAM J. CLINTON
NOTE: This memorandum was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on January 10. The related memorandum of January 8 on notification is listed in Appendix D at the end of this volume.