William J. Clinton
June 22, 1998

Memorandum on Actions To Improve Children's Health Insurance Outreach
Memorandum for the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Secretary of Education, the Commissioner of Social Security
Subject:Federal Actions to Improve Children's Health Insurance Outreach
Last year, with bipartisan support from the Congress, I was pleased to sign into law the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP). This new program will help millions of children of working families obtain affordable and muchneeded health insurance. As of today, 20 States have had their CHIP plans approved and most States have applied for approval.
Yet, as recent studies show, rapidly implementing CHIP and ensuring that all eligible children are enrolled in this new program or Medicaid has never been more important. This month, a major report from the Institute of Medicine confirmed that children without health insurance are more likely to be sick, less likely to be immunized, and less likely to receive medical treatment for illnesses, such as recurrent ear infections and asthma. Without treatment, these diseases can have lifelong consequences. Another study by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research concluded that there are 4.7 million uninsured children who are eligible but not enrolled in Medicaid. Several million more will become eligible for CHIP as States implement their programs.
Only an intense, sustained campaign in both the public and private sectors can address the significant challenge of uninsured children. On February 18, 1998, I requested children's health outreach proposals from eight Federal agencies on how the executive branch of the United States Government can assist in children's health insurance outreach.
In response, I received theReport to the President: The Interagency Task Force on Children's Health Insurance Outreach,which contains proposals on how to engage the executive branch in children's health outreach. I have reviewed this report and found these proposals sound, innovative, and worth undertaking.
Therefore, I hereby direct you to take the following actions to promote children's health insurance outreach, consistent with the missions of your agencies and the content and timelines of each potential initiative described in theReport.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall ensure that the:

The Secretary of Agriculture shall, among other proposed actions:

The Secretary of Education shall, among other proposed actions:
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall, among other proposed actions:
The Secretary of Interior shall, among other proposed actions:
The Secretary of Labor shall, among other proposed actions:
The Secretary of the Treasury shall, among other proposed actions:
The Commissioner of Social Security shall, among other proposed actions:
I also direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services to continue to work with the above mentioned agencies to assist them in fulfilling these commitments, to engage new agencies and develop other commitments, and report back to me in 1 year on agency accomplishments.
WILLIAM J. CLINTON