William J. Clinton
March 07, 1996

Memorandum on Drawdown of Commodities and Services From the Departments of Defense, the Treasury, Transportation, and Justice and Drawdown of Defense Articles, Defense Services, and Training From the Department of Defense for Israel
Presidential Determination No. 96-17
Memorandum for the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, [and] the Secretary of Transportation
Subject:Drawdown of Commodities and Services From the Departments of Defense, the Treasury, Transportation, and Justice and Drawdown of Defense Articles, Defense Services, and Training From the Department of Defense for Israel
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 552(c)(2) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, 22 U.S.C. 2348a(c)(2) (the "Act"), I hereby determine that:
(1) as a result of an unforeseen emergency, the provision of assistance under Chapter 6 of Part II of the Act in amounts in excess of funds otherwise available for such assistance is important to the national interests of the United States; and
(2) such unforeseen emergency requires the immediate provision of assistance under Chapter 6 of Part II of the Act.
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 506(a)(1) of the Act, 22 U.S.C. 2318(a)(1) (the "Act"), I hereby determine that:
(1) an unforeseen emergency exists that requires immediate military assistance to a foreign country or international organization; and
(2) the emergency requirement cannot be met under the authority of the Arms Export Control Act or any other law except section 506 of the Act.
I therefore direct the drawdown of commodities and services from the inventory and resources of the Departments of the Treasury, Transportation, Defense, and Justice of an aggregate value not to exceed $12 million and authorize the furnishing of up to $10 million in defense articles, defense services, and military education and training from the Department of Defense for detecting and disarming explosive devices.
The Secretary of State is authorized and directed to report this determination to the Congress and to arrange for its publication in the Federal Register.
WILLIAM J. CLINTON

THE WHITE HOUSE,

Washington, March 7, 1996.
Justification for Drawdown Under Sections 552(c)(2) and 506(a)(1) of the Foreign Assistance Act To Support the Provision of Emergency Anti-Terrorism Assistance to the Government of Israel
The State of Israel has been struck by four massive suicide bombing attacks during the past week. These attacks have resulted in heavy loss of life and property and threaten further progress in the Middle East peace process. Such an outcome would severely damage a major historic initiative that is a top U.S. foreign policy priority.
Israel has requested assistance to obtain explosive detection and disarming equipment for use at Gaza and other border crossings and to protect transport and infrastructure. We have determined that the most effective way to respond to this request is to provide to Israel equipment and supplies to help counter this terrorist threat, along with associated transport. The equipment and supplies are mostly made by U.S. suppliers. Training and services on the use of the equipment as well as assistance in assembling it will also be provided as needed. This assistance will be used by Israeli security forces to detect and disarm explosive devices.
For this purpose the President intends to exercise the special drawdown authorities in section 552(c)(2) and section 506(a)(1 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. Such assistance will help the Israeli government combat an immediate and deadly terrorist threat aimed at undermining the security of Israel and subverting the Middle East peace process.
For these reasons, the use of the emergency authorities discussed above to provide the goods and services described above is important to the national interests of the United States.