William J. Clinton
March 25, 1998

Communique: Entebbe Summit for Peace and Prosperity
JOINT DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES
The Entebbe Summit of Heads of State and Government
At the joint invitation of H.E. President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of the Republic of Uganda and H.E. President William Jefferson Clinton of the United States of America, their excellencies Mr. Daniel T. arap Moi, President of the Republic of Kenya, Mr. Pasteur Bizimungu, President of the Republic of Rwanda, Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Laurent Desire Kabila, President of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, met on Wednesday 25 March, 1998 at Entebbe, Uganda.
The exchange of views between the African leaders and the President of the United States marks a new beginning, launching a process of defining and building a U.S.-Africa partnership for the 21st Century. The Heads of State and Government reaffirm the historical bonds between the people of America and Africa. We pledge to deepen these ties through a lasting partnership rooted in common values and recognition of our interdependence, and built upon mutual respect and the sovereign equality of nations. The Leaders commit themselves to honor and execute agreements mutually concluded by all the parties to rigorously pursue Africa's economic growth and transformation, and full integration into the global economy.
Putting Partnership into Practice:
The Heads of State and Government recognize that to effect this new, genuine and transparent partnership, there is a need to commit ourselves to the identification and acknowledgment of both our mutual and divergent interests, the pursuit of free and frank discussions, and a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities of each partner.
A Partnership Built on Principle and a Shared Vision:
The Heads of State and Government recognize that a lasting partnership must be built on the principles of shared ownership, joint responsibility, and full transparency.
The Heads of State and Government further acknowledge a shared vital interest in long-term meaningful engagement. We affirm that Africa and the United States hold a mutual interest: in fostering Africa's economic and political transformation and full integration into the global economy, and in promoting democratic participation and respect for human rights. We affirm that social, economic and political inclusion is the foundation for lasting peace and stability. The Leaders declared that African and American security interests alike will be advanced by a joint attack on the transnational problems of terrorism, disease, proliferation of weapons, drug trafficking and environmental degradation.
On Building a New Economic Future:
Recognizing that Africa's stability, and democracy's viability, are rooted in the alleviation of poverty and the achievement of sustainable economic development, the Heads of State and Government commit themselves to a series of measures designed to speed Africa's transformation and full integration into the global economy, and to expand mutually beneficial trade and investment opportunities:
On Condemnation of Acts of Genocide
The Heads of State and Government recognize the accomplishment of the Government of Rwanda in halting the 1994 genocide, condemn all acts of genocide and pledge to undertake a concerted effort to prevent is resurgence. To this end:
On Fostering Democratic Participation, Human Rights and Regional Stability:
The Heads of State and Government affirm that the destiny and security of Africa rest primarily in the hands of Africans themselves. The Leaders pledge to seek additional resources and, in consultation with the OAU and UN, to build upon ongoing efforts, both regionally and internationally, to strengthen and sustain regional security and African peacekeeping capacity. The Leaders condemn, and pledge continued cooperative efforts to resist, all forms of cross-border terrorism directed against civilians.
Recognizing that the stability of the region also depends on the sustainability of African democratization, the Heads of State and Government endorse the core principles of inclusion, the rule of law, respect for human rights, the equality of all men and women, and the right of citizens to regularly elect their leaders freely and to participate fully in the decision-making which affects them. Further:
On Pursuing the Partnership Into the Future:
The Heads of State and Government unanimously agree to explore mechanisms for regular consultations and encounters at the highest level between African and U.S. leaders. Noting the importance of mutual understanding between African and American citizens, we call for expanded cultural and educational exchanges.
The African leaders noted with appreciation President Clinton's historic visit to Africa and express the hope that his presence on the continent has opened a new chapter in Africa-U.S. relations. The Heads of State and Government recognize that the development of a lasting partnership, characterized by shared ownership and meaningful engagement, will require commitment, time and patience. The Leaders commit themselves to pursue this objective in the spirit of mutual respect, to deepen a frank and honest dialogue, to evaluate jointly progress made in the months ahead, and to secure a meaningful and lasting partnership for the 21st Century.
The President of the U.S.A. and the African Heads of State and Government express deep appreciation to President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Government and the people of Uganda for the warm hospitality accorded to them during their visit to Uganda. Done at Entebbe, Uganda on Wednesday 25 March, 1998.
WILLIAM JEFFERSON CLINTON, President of the United States of America.

DANIEL T. ARAP MOI, President of the Republic of Kenya.

BENJAMIN WILLIAM MKAPA, President of the United Republic of Tanzania.

MELES ZENAWI, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.

YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI, President of the Republic of Uganda.

PASTEUR BIZIMUNGU, President of the Republic of Rwanda

LAURENT DESIRE KABILA, President of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Entebbe, Uganda

25. March, 1998
NOTE: The joint statement was made available by the Office of the Press Secretary but was not issued as a White House press release. An original was not available for verification of the content of this joint statement.