William J. Clinton
May 03, 2000

Executive Order 13153—Actions To Improve Low-Performing Schools
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA), the Department of Education Appropriations Act, 2000 (as contained in Public Law 106–113), and in order to take actions to improve low-performing schools, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Policy. Since 1993, this Administration has sought to raise standards for students and to increase accountability in public education while investing more resources in elementary and secondary schools. While much has been accomplished—there has been progress in math and reading achievement, particularly for low-achieving students and students in our highest poverty schools—much more can be done, especially for low-performing schools.
Sec. 2. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building. (a) The Secretary of Education ("Secretary") shall work with State and local educational agencies ("LEAs") to develop and implement a comprehensive strategy for providing technical assistance and other assistance to States and LEAs to strengthen their capacity to improve the performance of schools identified as low performing. This comprehensive strategy shall include a number of steps, such as:
Sec. 4. Compliance Monitoring System. Consistent with the implementation of the School Improvement Fund, the Secretary shall strengthen the Department’s monitoring of ESEA requirements for identifying and turning around low-performing schools, as well as any new requirements established for the School Improvement Fund by Public Law 106–113. The Secretary shall give priority to provisions that have the greatest bearing on identifying and turning around low-performing schools, including sections 1116 and 1117 of the ESEA, and to developing an ongoing, focused, and systematic
process for monitoring these provisions. This improved compliance monitoring shall be designed to:
(a) ensure that States and LEAs comply with ESEA requirements;
(b) assist States and LEAs in implementing effective procedures and strategies that reflect the best research available, as well as the experience of successful schools, school districts, and States as they address similar objectives and challenges; and
(c) assist States, LEAs, and schools in making the most effective use
of available Federal resources.

Sec. 5. Consultation. The Secretary shall, where appropriate, consult with

executive agencies, State and local education officials, educators, community

based groups, and others in carrying out this Executive order.
Sec. 6. Judicial Review. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the executive branch and is not intended to, and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

May 3, 2000.