William J. Clinton
May 23, 2000

Executive Order 13157—Increasing Opportunities for Women-Owned Small Businesses
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 631, et seq., section 7106 of the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994 (Public Law 103–355), and the Office of Federal Procurement Policy, 41 U.S.C. 403, et seq., and in order to strengthen the executive branch’s commitment to increased opportunities for women-owned small businesses, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Executive Branch Policy. In order to reaffirm and strengthen the statutory policy contained in the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 644(g)(1), it shall be the policy of the executive branch to take the steps necessary to meet or exceed the 5 percent Government-wide goal for participation in procurement by women-owned small businesses (WOSBs). Further, the executive branch shall implement this policy by establishing a participation goal for WOSBs of not less than 5 percent of the total value of all prime contract awards for each fiscal year and of not less than 5 percent of the total value of all subcontract awards for each fiscal year.
Sec. 2. Responsibilities of Federal Departments and Agencies. Each department and agency (hereafter referred to collectively as "agency") that has procurement authority shall develop a long-term comprehensive strategy to expand opportunities for WOSBs. Where feasible and consistent with the effective and efficient performance of its mission, each agency shall establish a goal of achieving a participation rate for WOSBs of not less than 5 percent of the total value of all prime contract awards for each fiscal year and of not less than 5 percent of the total value of all subcontract awards for each fiscal year. The agency’s plans shall include, where appropriate, methods and programs as set forth in section 4 of this order.
Sec. 3. Responsibilities of the Small Business Administration. The Small Business Administration (SBA) shall establish an Assistant Administrator for Women’s Procurement within the SBA’s Office of Government Contracting. This officer shall be responsible for:
Sec. 4. Other Responsibilities of Federal Agencies. To the extent permitted by law, each Federal agency shall work with the SBA to ensure maximum participation of WOSBs in the procurement process by taking the following steps:
Sec. 5. Subcontracting Plans. The head of each Federal agency, or designated representative, shall work closely with the SBA, OFPP, and others to develop procedures to increase compliance by prime contractors with subcontracting plans proposed under section 8(d) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 637(d)) or section 834 of Public Law 101–189, as amended (15 U.S.C. 637 note), including subcontracting plans involving WOSBs.
Sec. 6. Action Plans. If a Federal agency fails to meet its annual goals in expanding contract opportunities for WOSBs, it shall work with the SBA to develop an action plan to increase the likelihood that participation goals will be met or exceeded in future years.
Sec. 7. Compliance. Independent agencies are requested to comply with the provisions of this order.
Sec. 8. Consultation and Advice. In developing the long-term comprehensive strategies required by section 2 of this order, Federal agencies shall consult with, and seek information and advice from, State and local governments, WOSBs, other private-sector partners, and other experts.
Sec. 9. Judicial Review. This order is for internal management purposes for the Federal Government. It does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, its employees, or any other person.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

May 23, 2000.