William J. Clinton
May 06, 1997

Joint Statement on Migration Adopted by the President of the United States and the President of Mexico
The issue of migration of Mexican nationals to the United States is a priority on our bilateral agenda. We, the Presidents of the United States and Mexico hereby politically commit our respective governments to strive to ensure a proper and respectful management of this complex phenomenon taking into consideration its diverse causes and economic and social consequences in both countries.
During the last two years, our governments have engaged in consultations and exchange of information through many mechanisms and have produced significant progress in the bilateral treatment of issues such as human rights and consular protection of migrants and efforts to combat migrant trafficking. This constructive dialogue should serve as a first step leading to specific proposals to manage migration between our nations in a mutually beneficial manner.
In pursuing these proposals, our governments reaffirm a commitment to enhanced bilateral cooperation in the management of migration. We will be guided by the following principles:
On the basis of these principles, we, the Presidents of the United States and Mexico commit our governments to intensify dialogue and to accelerate efforts to achieve the following goals:
We, the Presidents of the United States and Mexico, affirm our governments' political will to strive to fulfill a vision of our shared border in the twenty-first century as a place that supports and depends on building communities of cooperation rather than of conflict. In pursuance of this vision, our governments will work together to expand upon the foundation of progress made through joint planning and cooperation during the last two years in certain border areas. Both administrations will intensify efforts to achieve the following goals:
We, the Presidents of the United States and Mexico, call on the relevant agencies of both administrations to report to us in one year, through the Binational Commission, on the progress made towards the better management of the migration phenomenon and the trans formation of our border into a model area of bilateral cooperation.
WILLIAM J. CLINTON, President
The United State of America
ERNESTO ZEDILLO PONCE DE LEÓN, President
Federal Republic of Mexico
NOTE: An original was not available for verification of the content of this joint statement.