William J. Clinton
November 16, 1993

Executive Order 12880—National Drug Control Program
The Office of National Drug Control Policy has the lead responsibility within the Executive Office of the President to establish policies, priorities, and objectives for the Nation’s drug control program, with the goal of reducing the production, availability, and use of illegal drugs. All lawful and reasonable means must be used to ensure that the United States has a comprehensive and effective National Drug Control Strategy.
Therefore, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1988, as amended (21 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.), and in order to provide for the effective management of the drug abuse policies of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. General Provisions. (a) Because the United States considers the operations of international criminal narcotics syndicates as a national security threat requiring an extraordinary and coordinated response by civilian and military agencies involved in national security, the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy (Director), in his role as the principal adviser to the National Security Council on national drug control policy (50 U.S.C. 402(f)), shall provide drug policy guidance and direction in the development of related national security programs.
Sec. 2. Goals, Direction, Duties and Responsibilities with Respect to the National Drug Control Program. (a) Budget Matters. (1) In addition to the budgetary authorities and responsibilities provided to the Director by statute, 21 U.S.C. 1502, for those agency budget requests that are not certified as adequate to implement the objectives of the National Drug Control Strategy, the Director shall include in such certifications initiatives or funding levels that would make such requests adequate.
William J. Clinton

THE WHITE HOUSE,

November 16, 1993.