William J. Clinton
November 07, 1998

Electronic Mail Message to John Glenn
Dear John,
Thanks for your message. Hillary and I had a great time at the launch. We are very proud of you and the entire crew, and a little jealous. We can't wait for you to get home so we can have a first hand report. Meanwhile back on earth, we're having a lot of fun with your adventure. At a camp rally in Queens, I asked an 83 year old lady what she thought of your trip. She replied that it seemed like a perfectly fine thing for a young man like you to do! I hope your last few hours go well. Give my best to the rest of the crew.
Sincerely,
BILL CLINTON
NOTE: The message was transmitted in the morning from the White House to John Glenn aboard the space shuttleDiscoveryorbiting the Earth. The transcript released by the Office of the Press Secretary also included the text of the message from John Glenn to the President, as follows:
Dear Mr. President,
This is certainly a first for me, writing to a President from space, and it may be a first for you in receiving an E mail direct from and orbiting spacecraft.
In any event, I want to personally thank you and Mrs. Clinton for coming to the Cape to d/see the launch. I hope you enjoyed it just half as much as we did on board. It is truly an awesome experience from a personal standpoint, and of even greater importance for all of the great research projects we have on Discovery. The whole crew was impressed that you would be the first President to personally see a shuttle launch and asked me to include their best regards to you Hillary. She has discussed her interest in the space program with Annie on several occasions, and I know she would like to be on a flight just like this one.
We have gone almost a third of the way around the world in the time it has taken me to write this letter, and the rest of the crew is waiting. Again, our thanks and best regards. Will try to give you a personal briefing after we return next Saturday.
Sincerely,
JOHN GLENN