Grover Cleveland
July 02, 1888

Executive Order
SPECIAL DEPARTMENTAL RULE NO. I.
In addition to the exceptions from examination made by Departmental Rule III, clause 2, the following exceptions to examinations for the classified departmental service are hereby made, viz:
I. In the Department of State: Lithographer.
2. In the Department of the Treasury:
In the office of the Secretary: Government actuary.
In the office of the Comptroller of the Currency: Bond clerk.
In the office of the Supervising Architect: Supervising Architect, assistant supervising architect, confidential clerk to Supervising Architect, and photographer.
In the Bureau of the Mint: Assayer, examiner, computer of bullion, and adjuster of accounts.
In the Bureau of Navigation: Clerk of class 4, acting as deputy commissioner.
In the office of Construction of Standard Weights and Measures: Adjuster and mechanician.
In the Bureau of Engraving and Printing: Chief of the Bureau, assistant chief of Bureau, engravers, and plate printers.
In the Coast and Geodetic Survey: Superintendent, confidential clerk to Superintendent the normal or field force, general office assistant, confidential clerk to general office assistant, engravers and contract engravers, electrotypist and photographer, electrotypist's helper, apprentice to electrotypist and photographer, copperplate printers, plate-printers' helpers, and mechanicians.
In the office of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue: Superintendent of stamp vault.
3. In the Department of the Interior:
In the office of the Secretary: Superintendent of documents, clerk of class 3 as custodian, clerk to sign land patents, and telephone operator.
In the office of the Assistant Attorney-General: Law clerks--One at $2,750 per annum, one at $2,500 per annum, one at $2,250 per annum, and thirteen at $2,000 per annum.
In the Patent Office: Financial clerk, examiner of interferences, and law clerk.
In the General Land Office: Two law clerks, two law examiners, clerk of class 4 acting as receiving clerk, and ten principal examiners of land claims and contests.
In the Bureau of pensions: Assistant chief clerk, medical referee, assistant medical referee, and law clerk.
In the Bureau of Indian Affairs: Principal bookkeeper.
In the office of Commissioner of Railroads: Railroad engineer.
In the Bureau of Education: Collector and compiler of statistics and statistician.
In the Geological Survey: In permanent force--General assistant, executive officer, photographer, twelve geologists, two paleontologists, two chemists, chief geographer, three topographers, and three geographers. In temporary force--Six paleontologists, eight geologists, geographer, mechanician, and editor.
4. In the Department of War: Clerk for the General of the Army and clerk for the retired General of the Army.
In the office of the Chief Signal Officer: Lithographer.
5. In the Department of the Navy:
In the Hydrographic Office: Engravers, copperplate printers, printers' apprentices.
6. In the Department of Justice: Pardon clerk and two law clerks.
7. In the Department of Agriculture:
In the office of the Commissioner: Private secretary to the chief clerk, superintendent of grounds, and assistant chief of each of the following divisions: of botany, of chemistry, of entomology, of forestry, and of statistics.
In the Bureau of Animal Industry: Chief of the Bureau, assistant chief, private secretary to chief, and chief clerk.
8. In the Post-Office Department: Assistant Attorney-General, law clerk, and agents and employees at postal-note, postage-stamp, postal-card, and envelope agencies.
9. In the Department of Labor: Statistical experts and temporary experts. Approved, July 2, 1888.
GROVER CLEVELAND