Herbert Hoover
April 14, 1931

Address to the Pan American Union.
Gentlemen of the Governing Board:
I am glad to be your guest at this special session of the Governing Board of the Pan American Union which you are holding in honor of Pan American Day. I recently issued a proclamation,1calling upon our people to give this day due observance, and this proclamation has received general approval throughout the country. Exercises are being held at this time in public schools and universities and by civic organizations in every section of the Union. Pan American Day will become an outward symbol of the constantly strengthening unity of purpose and unity of ideals of the Republics of this hemisphere.
1 See 1930 volume, Item 169.
In the latter part of 1928, I had the privilege of visiting 11 of the countries of Latin America.2This visit made a deep and lasting impression upon me. It was inspiring to observe, at first hand, not only the progress that Latin America is making along social, economic, and cultural lines, but also the important part which the countries you represent are destined to play in world affairs. It was clear, too, that the nations of America have everything to gain by keeping in close touch with one another and by developing that spirit of mutual confidence which has its roots in a reciprocal understanding of national aims and aspirations.
2 See 1929 volume, Supplement IV.
Although each of the Republics of this hemisphere possesses problems peculiar to itself, there are certain basic questions relating to democratic progress and social betterment common to us all and in the solution of which we can be most helpful to one another. This spirit of mutual helpfulness is the cornerstone of true Pan Americanism. The Pan American Union not only symbolizes this spirit, but gives to it concrete expression in many practical and constructive ways.
It is of the greatest importance that the people of the United States become better acquainted with the history, the traditions, the culture, and the ideals of the other Republics of America. To an increasing extent, courses on the languages, literature, and history of the nations of Latin America are being offered in the educational institutions of the United States. A similar realization of the importance of becoming better acquainted with the history and development of the United States exists in the countries of Latin America. Increasing numbers of students from the countries to the south are being enrolled in the colleges and universities of the United States. I cannot emphasize too strongly this important aspect of inter-American relations. These cultural currents not only contribute to better international understanding, but also emphasize the essential unity of interest of the American Republics.
Through the Pan American Society and its branches established in different sections of the country, the importance and significance of the culture of the Latin American nations are being brought home to our people. We owe much to the unselfish men who have devoted so much time and energy to this work. The activities of the Pan American Society admirably supplement the important work that is being done by the Pan American Union.
A peculiarly heavy responsibility rests upon the nations of the Western Hemisphere; a responsibility which, at the same time, is a high privilege. Richly endowed by nature, we enjoy the great advantage of inhabiting a hemisphere free from the jealousies and antagonisms which have proved such obstacles to progress and prosperity in other sections of the world. We have developed an international system based on the principle of equality, combined with a full recognition of the obligations as well as the rights of states.
The American Republics are today rapidly approaching the time when every major difference existing between them will be settled by the orderly processes of conciliation and arbitration. In this respect, the Western Hemisphere has placed an enviable record before the nations of the world. From the earliest period of their history, the governments of the Republics of this hemisphere have been earnest advocates of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. They have demonstrated their willingness and even eagerness to adopt and apply mediation, conciliation, and arbitration. The common purpose to eliminate war and the determination to achieve peace and security represent a major contribution of the Americas to modern civilization.
The full significance of this achievement is not always realized, for it carries with it heavy obligations to posterity. Future progress along these lines can only be assured through constant vigilance and by an unswerving determination to make the union of the American Republics, as now expressed in the Pan American Union, an example to the world. We are not attempting in any way to develop a superstate, or to interfere with the freedom of action of any of the states, members of the Union, but rather to develop an atmosphere of good will--a spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding--in which any difference that may arise, no matter how important, will find a ready solution.
I cordially congratulate you, gentlemen of the Governing Board, on your happy initiative in establishing Pan American Day and, at the same time, I send a message of fraternal greeting, in the name of the people of the United States, to all the inhabitants of our sister Republics.
Note: The President spoke at 12:30 p.m. in the Pan American Building.