Herbert Hoover
February 20, 1931

Letters to Senator Thomas D. Schall About the Appointment of a District Judge for Minnesota.
[Released February 20, 1931. Dated February 10, 1931 ]
My dear Mr. Senator:
It is extremely desirable that a new District Judge for the State of Minnesota should be appointed and confirmed at the present session of Congress. I would be glad if you could accept the suggestion in my letter of February 3rd that you give me a list of the names of men who may be investigated as to fitness for this appointment.
It would be a misfortune if Minnesota should not have the advantage of the establishment of this Court during the present session of Congress.

Yours faithfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
[ The Honorable Thomas D. Schall, United States Senate]
[Released February 20, 1931. Dated February 18, 1931]
My dear Mr. Senator:
The need for an additional United States Judge in Minnesota is pressing.

On February 3rd, and again on the 10th I wrote you asking that you suggest the names of men you would consider fit for this place but you have not done so.
Among those who seem to have substantial support from citizens of Minnesota are:

CHARLES LORING, of Crookston, Associate Justice, Supreme Court of Minnesota

JULIUS E. HAYCROFT, of Fairmont, Judge of District Court, 17th

District FRED W. SENN, of Waseca, Judge of District Court, 5th District
GUNNAR H. NORDBYE, Of Minneapolis, Judge of District Court, Hennepin County

NORMAN E. PETERSON, Of Albert Lea, Judge of District Court, 10th District

ALFRED L. THWING, of Grand Rapids, Judge of District Court, 15th District

CARLTON P. MCNALLY, Judge of District Court of Ramsey County

EDWIN J. KENNY, of Duluth, Judge of District Court, 11th District.
If you have any information as to the qualifications of any of these men for the position of Federal Judge, I should be pleased to have it.

Yours faithfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
[The Honorable Thomas D. Schall, United States Senate]
[Released February 20, 1931. Dated February 19, 1931 ]
My dear Mr. Senator:
I have your letter of February 18 acknowledging mine of that date and presenting the names of various men from Minnesota for the District Judgeship. You do not, however, give me your views as to the men whose names I submitted to you in my letter.
I consider it desirable in the interest of the people of Minnesota that the man appointed shall not only have had judicial experience, but shall be entirely free from any private connections which might be challenged.
None of the men you have suggested have been proposed by the citizens of Minnesota and the Department of Justice is lacking in information regarding them. It would require a considerable period of time to investigate these men as to fitness and connections, and since it is necessary, if we make the appointment at this session, that the name should be sent up not later than tomorrow, I would be glad indeed if you would express to me your views on the men whose names I submitted to you yesterday.

Yours faithfully,
HERBERT HOOVER
[The Honorable Thomas D. Schall, United States Senate]
Note: In his letter of February 18, 1931, Senator Schall suggested the following 10 lawyers for the judgeship: Frank Ellsworth, M. M. Joyce, Mark Wooley, Thomas McMeekin, Frank Murphy, John Roeser, John P. Devaney, Thomas Mangan, George Smith, and Charles H. March.
On February 20, the White House issued biographical data and a list of endorsers for Gunnar H. Nordbye in connection with his appointment as United States District Judge for the District of Minnesota. The President signed a recess commission for Mr. Nordbye on March 30.