Herbert Hoover
February 21, 1931

Message to the Senate Transmitting a Report on United States Relations With Nicaragua.
To the Senate of the United States:
In response to Senate Resolution 386 of January 5, 1931, I transmit herewith a report by the Secretary of State inclosing a memorandum and copies of documents referred to therein.
HERBERT HOOVER
Note: The Secretary of State's report is printed in Senate Document 288 (71st Cong., 3d sess.).
In 1931, the United States had approximately 1,500 marines stationed in Nicaragua. The Senate passed Resolution 386 following an incident in which insurgents, loyal to Augusto Cesar Sandino, killed eight American marines. Secretary of State Stimson's letter accompanying the report follows:
The President:
The undersigned, the Secretary of State, to whom was referred Senate Resolution 386, of January 5, 1931, reading as follows:
"Resolved, that the Secretary of State be, and he is hereby requested to transmit to the Senate all communications, documents, reports, and agreements, since 1924, or copies thereof, relating to the landing or maintenance of United States marines in Nicaragua; and all notes, communications, or agreements, or copies thereof, passing between the Governments of the United States and Nicaragua, concerning elections to be held in Nicaragua, the formation and training of the constabulary or native police of Nicaragua; the duties to be performed by said constabulary and by United States marines; the mode of compensating said constabulary and the amount thereof" --has the honor to inform the President that there are attached hereto, with a view to their transmission to the Senate should the President's judgment approve thereof, copies of all notes, communications, or agreements passing between the Governments of the United States and Nicaragua concerning the elections in Nicaragua, the formation and training of the constabulary or native police in Nicaragua, the duties to be performed by said constabulary and by United States marines, and the mode of compensating said constabulary and the amount thereof.
There is also attached hereto a statement regarding the landing or maintenance of United States marines in Nicaragua since the present administration took office, together with copies of all communications, documents, reports, or agreements relating to the landing or maintenance of such United States marines in Nicaragua since the present administration took office.
The Secretary of State has the honor to inform the President after thorough consideration of the matter and an examination of the papers that he has reached the conclusion that it would not be compatible with the interests of the United States to furnish the papers relating to the landing or maintenance of United States marines in Nicaragua prior to the present administration. He will, however, be glad to go before the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate in executive session with copies of all these documents should that be the desire of the Senate or of the Foreign Relations Committee.
HENRY L. STIMSON