Herbert Hoover
July 29, 1931

Message to King Prajadhipok of Siam on His Departure From the United States.
[Released July 29, 1931. Dated July 28, 1931]
AT THE MOMENT of Your Majesties' departure from the United States, I wish to express to Your Majesty and to Queen Rambai Barni my pleasure and that of Mrs. Hoover that Your Majesties chose to visit this country and that you gave us the pleasure of your visit to Washington. I wish you a most enjoyable and safe journey homeward and long years of usefulness as ruler of your happy and prosperous country. Mrs. Hoover joins me in thanking Your Majesties for the kind message which has just been received from you. I am certain that the American people will rejoice with me in learning that you have enjoyed your residence here and that your health has been benefited.
HERBERT HOOVER
[His Majesty The King of Siam, On Board Siamese Royal Train, Care of Station Master, Delaware and Hudson Railway, Rouses Point, New York]
Note: The President's message was in response to a telegram from King Prajadhipok on his departure for Canada.
During his visit to the United States, the King and his party resided at Mrs. Whitelaw Reid's home, Ophir Hall, in White Plains, N.Y. King Prajadhipok's telegram, dated July 28, 1931, follows:
As I leave Ophir Hall on the termination of my stay in the United States of America I desire to express to you, Mr. President, my hearty appreciation of the welcome accorded to me not only at your hands and those of the officials of your government, but at the hands of the citizens of this friendly country; appreciation of the unvarying good will and of the interest evinced in the objects of my visit, and of the numerous courtesies extended to me and to my party during the three months of our residence here. In thanking you sincerely and the American people for these tokens of amity it is a pleasure to assure you that I take with me besides many pleasant memories a gratifying impression of the enhancement of the previously happy relations between our two countries and in addition a personal evidence of the skill of American physicians.
I would request you, Mr. President, to accept my warm regards and hopes for the welfare of your country and in conclusion the Queen joins me in taking leave of and in kind wishes to Mrs. Hoover.
PRAJADHIPOK