Herbert Hoover
September 08, 1930

Remarks Welcoming Captain Dieudonne Costes and Lieutenant Maurice Bellonte.
IT GIVES ME great pleasure to welcome you here today. Every American recalls the 30 hours and more of intense emotion that gripped us all while our own Colonel Lindbergh was winging his way to Paris, and the sense of relief and joy that swept over the Nation when word came that he had safely landed. Our pride and happiness were redoubled when we heard of the magnificent reception given to him by the Government and people of France. Our hearts went out in fraternal warmth to those who had so royally welcomed our national hero.
Today, therefore, every American knows exactly what pride and happiness possesses every French heart, at the knowledge that these two gallant sons of France stand safely on our soil. We wish the people of France to know that our welcome of their two heroes is warm and spontaneous and universal. We rejoice that this brilliant feat has been accomplished. We are delighted to honor these two men who have thus dramatically recalled Colonel Lindbergh's call.
This return visit of French aviators is even more than an occasion for national rejoicing and international felicitations. What they have done, what the great American aviators have done, Byrd, Rickenbacker and the rest, both those who sacrificed themselves wholly and those who live, is a glory of the whole human race. It demonstrates again the high courage of mankind. It gives heart to all of us in whatever tasks engage us, for it proves that there are no limits to the courage of men and that there are no limits to what that courage can accomplish.
Again, gentlemen, I welcome you, on behalf of the American Government and on behalf of the American people.
Note: The President spoke at 12:30 p.m. at a White House ceremony honoring the two aviators. Standing beside them were three of America's most distinguished aviators: Col. Charles A. Lindbergh, Rear Adm. Richard E. Byrd, and Capt. Edward V. Rickenbacker. The ceremony was broadcast both on national radio and through an international hookup to France, Great Britain, and Germany.