Herbert Hoover
January 11, 1933

Special Message to the Congress on Bankruptcy Legislation.
To the Senate and House of Representatives:
On February 29th last I addressed the Congress on the urgent necessity for revision of the bankruptcy laws, and presented detailed proposals to that end. These proposals were based upon most searching inquiry into the whole subject which had been undertaken by the Attorney General at my direction. While it is desirable that the whole matter should be dealt with, some portions of these proposals as an amelioration of the present situation are proving more urgent every day. With view to early action, the department, committees and members of the Congress, have been collaborating in further development of such parts of these proposals as have, out of the present situation, become of most pressing need. I urge that the matter be given attention in this session, for effective legislation would have most helpful economic and social results in the welfare and recovery of the nation.
The process of forced liquidation through foreclosure and bankruptcy sale of the assets of individual and corporate debtors who through no fault of their own are unable in the present emergency to provide for the payment of their debts in ordinary course as they mature, is utterly destructive of the interests of debtor and creditors alike, and if this process is allowed to take its usual course misery will be suffered by thousands without substantial gain to their creditors, who insist upon liquidation and foreclosure in the vain hope of collecting their claims. In the great majority of cases such liquidation under present conditions is so futile and destructive that voluntary readjustments through the extension or composition of individual debts and the reorganization of corporations must be desirable to a large majority of the creditors.
Under existing law, even where majorities of the creditors desire to arrange fair and equitable readjustments with their debtors, their plans may not be consummated without prohibitive delay and expense, usually attended by the obstruction of minority creditors who oppose such settlements in the hope that the fear of ruinous liquidation will induce the immediate settlement of their claims.
The proposals to amend the Bankruptcy Act by providing for the relief of debtors who seek the protection of the court for the purpose of readjusting their affairs with their creditors carry no stigma of an adjudication in bankruptcy, and are designed to extend the protection of the court to the debtor and his property, while an opportunity is afforded the debtor and a majority of his creditors to arrange an equitable settlement of his affairs, which upon approval of the court will become binding upon minority creditors. Under such process it should be possible to avoid destructive liquidation through the composition and extension of individual indebtedness and the reorganization of corporations, with the full protection of the court extended to the rights and interests of creditors and debtors alike. The law should encourage and facilitate such readjustments, in proceedings which do not consume the estate in long and wasteful receiverships.
In the case of individual and corporate debtors all creditors should be stayed from the enforcement of their debts pending the judicial process of readjustment. The provisions dealing with corporate reorganizations should be applicable to railroads, and in such cases the plan of reorganization should not become effective until it has been approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission.
I wish again to emphasize that the passage of legislation for this relief of individual and corporate debtors at this Session of Congress is a matter of the most vital importance. It has a major bearing upon the whole economic situation in the adjustment of the relation of debtors and creditors. I therefore recommend its immediate consideration as an emergency action.
HERBERT HOOVER

The White House,
January 11, 1933.
Note: On March 3, 1933, the President approved H.R. 14359, the Bankruptcy Act of 1898, amendments (Public, No. 420, 47 Stat. 1467) which partially implemented his recommendations.