Herbert Hoover
October 17, 1930

Statement on Organization of Federal Activities for Employment.
THE PRESIDENT said:
"I have today requested Secretaries Lamont, Davis, Wilbur, Hurley, Hyde, Mellon, and Governor Meyer of the Federal Reserve Board to formulate and submit to me plans continuing and strengthening the organization of Federal activities for employment during the winter.
"There are three directions of organization in which the Federal Government activities can cooperate: First, cooperation with the Governors and employment organizations of the States and local communities; second, development of methods with the national industries; and third, in direct Federal employment in public works, et cetera.
"It will be remembered that 10 months ago we set up such arrangements which have continued since that time, and which have contributed greatly to reduce unemployment. At that time the Governors of many of the States established strong committees for action in relief and most of these organizations have shown a high record of real accomplishment. The present conditions of organization vary greatly in different States. In the great majority of industrial States the Governors have, on their own initiative, taken steps to reorganize or develop or further strengthen their organizations for the forthcoming winter. During the past few weeks I have been in communication with some of the Governors in development of methods by which the Federal Government can further supplement assistance to their organizations. The Cabinet committee will further discuss these conditions with Governors and State agencies and we will again seek the cooperation of our business leaders and our national industries which we have had on so generous a scale during the past year. We shall also review the Federal situation of public works and the situation in construction among the national industries together with other methods by which we can continue to be of assistance. There are no two States or municipalities where the problem is the same or where the methods for assistance are identical. With the survey of the methods in progress for the past 10 months we should have valuable suggestive material and information for the winter.
"The initiative of the various Governors and local authorities in preparation for the winter is well indicated by the action of the Governor of Illinois who recently organized a State committee; reorganized efforts with the mayor of Detroit; the committees created in New York; the extraordinarily effective organization in the State of Ohio, and at many other points throughout the country--all of them indicating a strong feeling of local responsibility and determination to meet the situation.
"As a nation we must prevent hunger and cold to those of our people who are in honest. difficulties."
Note: The President announced that a committee, composed of Secretary of Commerce Robert P. Lamont, Secretary of Labor James J. Davis, Secretary of the Interior Ray Lyman Wilbur, Secretary of Agriculture Arthur M. Hyde, Secretary of War Patrick J. Hurley, Secretary of the Treasury Andrew W. Mellon, and Governor of the Federal Reserve Board Eugene Meyer, would formulate and submit plans for the organization of Federal unemployment activities.
On October 21, 1930, Secretary Lamont, chairman of the committee, released the following statement concerning the purposes and methods of the new unemployment organization:
President Hoover has appointed a board consisting of five Cabinet officers and the Governor of the Federal Reserve Board, to cope with unemployment during the approaching winter months.
We have no desire either to exaggerate or underestimate the gravity of the problem. This is a deeply human problem. It enlists our sympathy--arouses our sense of responsibility--challenges our social competence.
It has, of course, had the constant attention of the administration since last fall. It has been a matter of continuing concern and continuing action. The appointment of this board now follows as a logical amplification of the same policy. Its purpose is to coordinate the activities of the various departments of the Federal Government, the States, cities, and local governments, and to develop further cooperation among our industries in order that the best and speediest results may be secured.
In a country one of whose difficulties is to dispose of a surplus of many commodities, no person, seeking work in order to provide for himself and his dependents, should be permitted to suffer from lack of food or fuel. To avert such deprivation, the President desires that the Federal Government shall continue to do its full part. The Government has many instrumentalities at its command. Public construction will be speeded and benefits from this will be widespread. Fortunately, there is in the country no lack of funds for constructive undertakings. Industry will continue to do its part. Governors of States, and local authorities are eagerly showing a desire to meet the situation, and they will be given the aid and cooperation which they naturally expect from the Federal Government in the effort to carry out the determination of President Hoover that "as a nation we must prevent hunger and cold to those of our people who are in difficulties."
Let us all set ourselves most earnestly to the task of combating unemployment in this country.
The committee welcomes all practical suggestions to relieve this temporary situation in which we find ourselves.