Herbert Hoover
October 01, 1931

Statement on Unemployment Relief Efforts in the State of Missouri.
THE PRESIDENT said:
"I am glad to announce that the Governor of Missouri has informed me that the State of Missouri is completing its organization to care for its unemployed. I have received the following telegram from the Governor:

Jefferson City, Missouri, September 30, 1931

The President

The White House
In your efforts to mobilize the strength of the nation to the end that no one go hungry or suffer needless privation this winter, you may be interested to know that the State of Missouri and the communities and cities of our state are organizing to do their share toward that same goal. I share your feeling that this problem should be met by private effort and that great good would result could each community take care of its own citizens. Nothing solidifies and strengthens a people like joint action to meet a common disaster. Those cities whose citizens band together and give unselfishly of their time, their energies and their money in order that their neighbors may not suffer in this time of distress will come out of this trial stronger and greater. You doubtless will receive the details of what we are doing from the Missouri members of your relief committee. I would like you to know however from me that our leaders of all parties of all creeds and of all walks of life are forgetting many of their differences and cooperating in a vigorous effort to enable Missouri and Missouri communities to take care of their own citizens this winter.

Henry S. Caulfield

Governor of Missouri.'
"The following States in addition to Missouri have indicated their ability to undertake their own problem: Rhode Island, Indiana, Michigan, Connecticut, Illinois, New York, California, West Virginia, and Delaware."
Note: During this period, the White House issued the texts of similar letters and telegrams from other States and localities endorsing the President's position on unemployment relief. For release dates, see Appendix A.