Herbert Hoover
January 03, 1933

Statement About the Reorganization of the Executive Branch.
THE PRESIDENT said:
"The proposals of Democratic leaders in Congress to stop the reorganization of Government functions which I have made is a backward step. The same opposition has now arisen which has defeated every effort at reorganization for 25 years. The chairman of one House committee discloses: 'Many members of the administration itself opposed Mr. Hoover's plan,' but that he had not called them to testify because 'he saw no reason to embarrass them. He could add that outside groups, congressional committees, and Members of Congress fear a reduction of influence in the administration of these functions. The proposal to transfer the job of reorganization to my successor is simply a device by which it is hoped that these proposals can be defeated. Statements that I have made over 10 years as to the opposition which has always thwarted reorganization have come true. Five years ago I said:
"'... Practically every single item in such a program has invariably met with opposition of some vested official, or it has disturbed some vested habit and offended some organized minority. It has aroused the paid propagandists. All these vested officials, vested habits, organized propaganda groups, are in favor of every item of reorganization except that which affects the bureau or the activity in which they are specially interested. No proposed change is so unimportant that it is not bitterly opposed by someone. In the aggregate, these directors of vested habits surround Congress with a confusing fog of opposition. Meantime, the inchoate voice of the public gets nowhere but to swear at 'bureaucracy'.
"Any real reorganization sensibly carried out will sooner or later embrace the very orders I have issued. For instance, the consolidation of all agencies into one coordinated public works function has been recommended by every study of the subject all these years. Every other advanced government on Earth has a definite public works department or division. No private business and no. other government would tolerate the division of its construction work into over 20 authorities in 12 different departments and establishments, as is the case of our Government. It is only by consolidation that duplication and waste of a multitude of offices and officials can be eliminated. It is the only way that the public can know what is going on in this branch of Government. They can only be brought under the limelight if they are concentrated in one place. It is the only way to further reduce logrolling and personal politics in these appropriations. The opposition to placing rivers and harbors work and a lot of independent activities into such a consolidation has been constant for years. The excuse that the services of the Army Engineers in the direction of such work will be sacrificed is untrue under the plan I have instituted.
"No other government and no good government would tolerate merchant marine activities separated over seven departments or independent establishments. The same can be said as to public health, education, land utilization, etc. Altogether I have directed that 58 boards, commissions, and bureaus should be consolidated into nine divisions. There are still others to be consolidated. Many regulatory functions now in the departments should be transferred to the Federal Trade and other regulating commissions. The financial and economic functions relating to agriculture should be consolidated. The major departments should be changed.
"Either Congress must keep its hands off now, or they must give to my successor much larger powers of independent action than given to any President if there is ever to be reorganization. And that authority to be effective should be free of the limitations in the law passed last year which gives Congress the veto power, which prevents the abolition of functions, which prevents the rearrangement of major departments. Otherwise it will, as is now being demonstrated in the present law, again be merely make-believe."
Note: On January 19, 1933, the House of Representatives passed House Resolution 334, disapproving Executive Orders 5959-5969 and preventing them from taking effect.
In the statement, the President referred to Representative John J. Cochran, chairman of the House Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments.
On the same day, the White House issued a series of extracts from President Hoover's previous statements concerning opposition to reorganization of the executive branch.