Herbert Hoover
June 18, 1929

The President's News Conference
GERMAN REPARATIONS AGREEMENT
THE PRESIDENT. I have a question as to whether the administration would submit the Young reparations agreement to Congress or not, or whether we become a signatory to it. Our Government is not a party to that agreement, and therefore, would not be a signatory to it. There is no occasion to submit the agreement to Congress. The only point for congressional action is an authority to the administration to reduce Germany's treaty obligations in respect to the comparatively minor items of Army occupation costs and mixed claims.
PROHIBITION ENFORCEMENT INCIDENTS AT THE CANADIAN BORDER
I have some questions as to the incidents on the border. I deeply deplore the killing of any person. The Treasury Department is making an effort to prevent the misuse of arms. Any case of misuse will be [p.190] determined by the orderly proceedings of the Department and the courts. I hope that the communities along the border will do their best to help the Treasury and the systematic war that is being carried on by international criminals against the laws of the United States. It is these activities that are at the root of all of our difficulties.
Q. Mr. President, is that for formal quotation ?
THE PRESIDENT. Yes--both of them.
RAILROAD CONSOLIDATION PLAN
I have another question as to whether or not I am advised of any intention of the Interstate Commerce Commission to publish an official railroad consolidation plan in the near future. I have no such advice. The Interstate Commerce Commission, as you know, is an independent agency, and does not consult the President.
INTEROCEANIC CANAL BOARD
We have a little statement here as to the creation of the Interoceanic Canal Board to aid the Secretary of War and the Chief of Engineers in the surveys authorized for the Nicaragua Canal. It will go into details. It gives you the appointments that were put out.
Note: President Hoover's thirty-first news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, June 18, 1929.
The White House also released texts of the President's statements on the German reparations agreement (see Item 126) and the Canadian border incidents (see Item 127).
In addition, the White House issued the following announcement of the membership of the Interoceanic Canal Board, together with brief biographical sketches of Mr. Williamson, Mr. Marston, and Mr. Williams:
INTEROCEANIC CANAL BOARD
In accordance with the provisions of Public Resolution No. 99, 70th Congress-authorizing certain surveys for Interoceanic Canals--
"That the President is hereby authorized to cause to be made, under the direction of the Secretary of War and the supervision of the Chief of Engineers, and with the aid of such civilian engineers as the President shall deem advisable, a full and complete investigation and survey", etc., etc. [p.191] the president has designated the following Board, to be known as the Interoceanic Canal Board, to aid the Secretary of War and the Chief of Engineers in connection with the surveys authorized by the resolution.
Maj. Gen. Edgar Jadwin
Chairman Maj. Ernest Graves, U.S.A., Retired
Mr. Sidney B. Williamson, Civil Engineer
Dr. Anson Marston, Civil Engineer
Mr. Frank M. Williams, Civil Engineer
First Lieutenant John Paul Dean, Corps of Engineers, has been designated to act as Secretary to the Board.