Herbert Hoover
May 28, 1929

The President's News Conference
RESIGNATION OF MABEL WALKER WILLEBRANDT
THE PRESIDENT. I have only one thing to announce of any importance. Mrs. Willebrandt has sent her resignation to me an hour ago, and I [p.157] am making an appropriate reply, and we will give you copies of the two letters.
Now for the background of this matter. I would like to say a little something, which I hope you won't take amiss. Mrs. Willebrandt has been a most effective official of this Government. She has shown the utmost devotion and great ability. There is absolutely no truth whatever to the stories that have been spread about disagreements between Mr. Mitchell and Mrs. Willebrandt or between myself and Mrs. Willebrandt or anybody in the Government. Mrs. Willebrandt remained in the administration after March 4, when she wished to go out to the private practice of law, at the request of the Attorney General that she might assist in building up the new steps in contemplation for tightening law enforcement.
She has had an extraordinary offer, which I do not feel justified in again requesting her to sacrifice. She made a considerable sacrifice after March 4 to remain in the Government. She has made recommendations with regard to arrangements in the Government which have been adopted, and there is, therefore, no basis for the statements which have gone abroad with regard to that very estimable lady.
I am not stating that for public quotation, but I do think that any public servant who has given 8 years and as much devotion and capacity as Mrs. Willebrandt has, certainly deserved recognition of that service from the American people.
Q. That is in the second category, Mr. President ?
THE PRESIDENT. My general feeling towards her capacity will be set out in my letter, and if you want to reflect that, that is the impression of the Federal Government.
Q. Mr. President, that last sentence--could that be used ?
THE PRESIDENT. No, I would rather not have it given the form of direct quotation. But I am explaining to you as something that lies in the administration of the press as distinguished from the public.
That is all that I have on my mind this morning that I am able to present to you.
Note: President Hoover's twenty-fifth news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, May 28, 1929.
On the same day, the White House issued the exchange of letters on Mrs. Willebrandt's resignation as Assistant Attorney General (see Item 91).