Herbert Hoover
September 15, 1931

The President's News Conference
WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON HOME BUILDING AND HOME OWNERSHIP
THE PRESIDENT. A year ago, after a conference with some 20 associations interested in the subject, I undertook to call a general conference on questions of homebuilding and homeownership.1Growing out of that meeting some 15 to 20 different committees were appointed for investigation of the fact, and those committees are now ready to develop their work still further. They represent the substantial people of the country in every branch of that problem, and a major conference will take place on the 5th of December.2I am giving you here an extended statement in respect to the whole of it which you will have a chance to read without my going over it.
1 See 1930 volume, Items 250 and 302.

2The Conference was held December 2-5, 1931.
APPOINTMENTS
I have a few questions here of background character.

"Has the President appointed Mr. [Waiter W.] Head, a banker of Omaha, on the Farm Board ?" The answer is in the negative.
"Is the President prepared to announce the appointment of anyone to the vacancies on the Tariff Commission?" I am not able to do so at the present time.
TRADE
"Has the President any plan for the expansion of foreign purchase of American cotton ?" There is no definite plan on my part. There was a plan some time ago--and this is background--to the bankers that they should arrange a credit basis system for export of cotton to Europe. They have taken it up and they are in negotiation both between themselves and the other side. I haven't any further information that I can report about it. That has not yet been concluded. That is all I can enlighten you on that subject.
I understand that I am supposed to go on the radio tomorrow night for something important--and I haven't myself yet heard of it.
Note: President Hoover's two hundred and eighth news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, September 15, 1931.
On the same day, the White House issued a text of the President's statement on the White House Conference on Home Building and Home Ownership (see Item 314).
At the conclusion of the news conference, the President referred to rumors to the effect that he intended to call a conference on world trade. For White House denial of these rumors, see Item 315.