Herbert Hoover
June 02, 1931

The President's News Conference
ARMY AIR CORPS MANEUVERS
THE PRESIDENT. I have sent a letter to the Secretary of War congratulating the Department for the success in the conduct of the maneuvers. That is the largest maneuver of airplanes ever executed and done without any serious mishap--a very remarkable performance.
AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT ECONOMY CONFERENCES
The conferences in the Department--with the Secretary and the heads of the divisions of the Department of Agriculture--bring out the fact that the appropriations available for expenditure by the Department during the fiscal year ending this month, together with the unexpended balances carried forward from last year--out of those they have saved $11 million during the year, scattered over the various divisions of the Department. They will carry forward a good many balances from this year over the 1st of July, a great many of which are obligated in contracts let, but disregarding the carryover, which is merely a financial transaction, the cuts for next year, that is the fiscal year beginning the 1st of July, is estimated at about $20 million.
APPOINTMENTS
There are two appointments. We have appointed Roy St. Lewis, of Oklahoma, Assistant Attorney General to fill the place made vacant by the resignation of George Farnum. I will give you a note on his experience. And as soon as Mr. St. Lewis is sworn in we will appoint Mr. Herbert Hyde, who is now assistant to Mr. St. Lewis, as United States Attorney for the Western District of Oklahoma.
AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT
In the matter of the Department of Agriculture statement I think you had better quote that as from the White House. It is not a matter that I care to announce personally.
AMBASSADOR CHARLES G. DAWES
Q. Do you care to say anything about your conference with Ambassador Dawes?
THE PRESIDENT. I have had no serious conferences with him yet. I had breakfast with him.
Note: President Hoover's one hundred and ninety-fifth news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, June 2, 1931.
On the same day, the White House issued a text of the letter to the Secretary of War about Army Air Corps maneuvers (see Item 212), and the text of a White House statement on the expenditures of the Department of Agriculture (see Item 213).