Herbert Hoover
June 11, 1929

The President's News Conference
VISIT OF THE BRITISH PRIME MINISTER
THE PRESIDENT. I have some questions about the proposed visit of Mr. Ramsay MacDonald, and I would like to talk to you purely from a background point of view. I do not wish to be quoted directly or indirectly.
We know nothing about Mr. MacDonald's visit except that which has come in the press and through press representatives. We have had no communication whatever outside of those avenues. The Government here would greatly welcome Mr. MacDonald's visit, and the whole American people, I think, would welcome him to the United States. General Dawes will arrive in London on Friday of this week, and in the ordinary course he will learn what is behind the whole of the press discussion. That being all that we know about the situation.
I have also a question which comes in the same category of things only for your information. I understand the Associated Press has sent out a story saying that prior to the British elections Prime Minister Baldwin was invited to visit America, and suggesting that the invitation was an official one and came from the White House. That is the first that I knew anything about that. Some 3 months ago there was some discussion in one of the London papers, I believe, that Mr. Baldwin had expected to visit Canada in case of his reelection, and would undoubtedly come down to the United States. So I suppose that is all there was behind that fire.
FLOOD CONTROL PROJECTS
One other question in respect to the flood control projects. I have not as yet had a report from the Attorney General and the Secretary of War on questions that were propounded by the congressional committee so that I am not able to add anything to that situation today.
That is all I have in mind.
Note: President Hoover's twenty-ninth news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, June 11, 1929.
Prime Minister J. Ramsay MacDonald took office on June 5, 1929, succeeding Stanley Baldwin. Charles G. Dawes was United States Ambassador to Great Britain.