Herbert Hoover
July 16, 1929

The President's News Conference
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we still maintain a considerable congregation!
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES
I had hoped to have some figures for purposes of discussing a question which was lodged here last week on some phases of Government [p.222] expenditure, but I have not enough figures yet to make it a real discussion. I will have to suspend it.
FEDERAL FARM BOARD MEMBERSHIP
I have also some questions about the Western member of the Farm Board. No conclusion has been reached as to that but this is purely background for you.
There are two or three divisions in the wheat groups amongst cooperative and farm activities in the marketing of grain. It has been very difficult to find anyone who commended himself to all the groups. We are still laboring on that problem and I hope to develop someone who will command respect, but it may take another week or two. In the meantime, the present Farm Board contains three or four men who have had grain experience and with Mr. [Chris L.] Christensen, who also has had large grain experience and who is now [Executive] Secretary of the Board, they will be able to get ahead with their programs and get ready for consultations with the various Midwest groups on the measures which the Farm Board proposes. Therefore, there need be no delay in any necessary action.
Q. Do you care to tell us what the three qualifications are, on which there is difference of opinion ?
THE PRESIDENT. There are, in 10 of the States, organized wheat pools that represent one form of cooperative activity of great importance. There are two or three different categories of farmer-owned and farmer-controlled elevators, which is another phase of cooperative marketing of grain. There has hitherto been some conflict between these groups.
That is about all I have on my mind that I am able to tell today. I hope to have more of a story on Government expenditures but I will give you that next time.
Note: President Hoover's thirty-eighth news conference was held in the White House at 12 noon on Tuesday, July 16, 1929.