Ronald Reagan
July 13, 1985

Letter to the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House on the Discharge of the President's Powers and Duties During His Surgery 
Dear Mr. President: (Dear Mr. Speaker:)
I am about to undergo surgery during which time I will be briefly and temporarily incapable of discharging the Constitutional powers and duties of the Office of the President of the United States.
After consultation with my Counsel and the Attorney General, I am mindful of the provisions of Section 3 of the 25th Amendment to the Constitution and of the uncertainties of its application to such brief and temporary periods of incapacity. I do not believe that the drafters of this Amendment intended its application to situations such as the instant one.
Nevertheless, consistent with my longstanding arrangement with Vice President George Bush, and not intending to set a precedent binding anyone privileged to hold this Office in the future, I have determined and it is my intention and direction that Vice President George Bush shall discharge those powers and duties in my stead commencing with the administration of anesthesia to me in this instance.
I shall advise you and the Vice President when I determine that I am able to resume the discharge of the Constitutional powers and duties of this Office.
May God bless this Nation and us all.
Sincerely,
RONALD REAGAN
Note: Identical letters were sent to Strom Thurmond, President pro tempore of the Senate, and Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of Representatives. The Vice President temporarily assumed the powers and duties of the Office of the President from 11:28 a.m. until 7:22 p.m. on July 13. At 11:28 a.m. the President underwent intestinal surgery at Bethesda Naval Hospital for the removal of a polyp. Subsequent analysis revealed that it was malignant but that the cancer had not spread and no further therapy was necessary. The President recovered more rapidly than anticipated and was released from the hospital on July 20.