Richard Nixon
April 22, 1970

Special Message to the Congress on Federal Disaster Assistance.
To the Congress of the United States:
The spirit of neighborliness, the readiness to extend a helping hand in time of trouble, is one of the great traditions of this country. In the early years of our history, good neighbors were essential in coping with the hardships of pioneer life. They are equally essential in meeting the challenges of life today.
The spirit of the good neighbor was particularly evident in 1969 when natural disasters struck this country in unprecedented numbers and with unprecedented force. Twenty-nine major disasters and an untold number of smaller disasters were responsible for over 300 deaths and an estimated $2 billion in property damage in the last calendar year. Events such as the California floods and Hurricane Camille with the Virginia floods were exceptionally destructive.
Private voluntary agencies have traditionally played a crucial role during times of disaster. State and local governments are key factors in any successful disaster relief effort. Thus the Federal role is only one part of the overall response of the Nation. But it is a very important part of that response. Under the Federal Disaster Acts of 1950, 1966, and 1969 and their amendments and under provisions in many other statutes, the Federal government works to help individuals through relief and rehabilitation efforts and to assist State and local governments by restoring public facilities essential to community life. In 1969 the Federal government allocated $150 million for assistance from the President's Disaster Relief Fund--the largest sum for any one year in history. Significant additional funds were spent on disaster assistance under other Federal programs. A report on our 1969 experience is being provided to the Congress.
We are confident that the general framework of our present program provides an effective mechanism for channeling Federal disaster assistance to individuals and communities. Rather than depending on a specialized disaster assistance agency, the present system makes maximum use of existing agencies, centrally coordinated by the Office of Emergency Preparedness, to perform tasks in time of emergency which are similar to those which they perform in normal circumstances. Our present arrangements also encourage constructive and cooperative efforts among individuals, local communities, the States and the Federal government.
At the same tune, however, we have learned that a number of improvements are in order within the existing framework. The last Presidential special message on the subject of disaster assistance was written 18 years ago. Since that time, this program has grown in a piecemeal and often haphazard manner, involving over 50 separate Congressional enactments and executive actions. This slow development process has created a complex program, one which has a number of gaps and overlaps and needs increased coordination. It is time for new legislation and executive action to make our Federal disaster assistance program more effective and efficient.
LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS
To extend and to improve the assistance which the Federal Government can provide in time of major disasters, I am asking the Congress to enact the Disaster Assistance Act of 1970. This legislation contains a number of specific proposals, the most important of which are the following:
Revenue Maintenance
When a community experiences a major disaster, the physical impact is obvious. What the television camera does not capture, however, is the loss of property tax revenue which occurs when a substantial portion of a community's property tax base is destroyed and its essential services are disrupted.
To ease this difficulty, I recommend that the Congress enact a property tax revenue maintenance plan. Under this plan, the Federal government would be authorized to lend money at favorable interest rates to local governments to make up their loss of property tax revenues following a major disaster.
Permanent Repair
I am asking the Congress for expanded Federal authority to permanently repair or fully replace essential public facilities damaged by disasters. This authorization would provide a more effective and practical approach to the replacement of damaged public facilities which are vital to community life. This Administration would give preference to local employees and contractors in repair and rebuilding work.
Economic Development Assistance
I am also asking the Congress to amend the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965, so that the Economic Development Administration would provide staff support, technical advice and financial assistance to those communities affected by major disasters. Such assistance is vital in recovery efforts, particularly when the community is attempting to begin long-range rebuilding or redevelopment efforts.
Disaster Loans
I am proposing legislation to improve the disaster loan programs of the Small Business Administration and of the Farmers Home Administration. These loans are among our principal sources of assistance to stricken individuals. The recommended changes would provide for improved refinancing, payment deferral, and forgiveness arrangements and would assure disaster loans to older citizens. My proposed amendment would allow the FHA and SBA to provide faster service and would therefore promote speedier recovery following disasters.
Unemployment Compensation
I am also recommending that the Congress extend for two years the expanded unemployment compensation provisions of the Disaster Relief Act of 1969. These provisions make temporary income available as promptly as possible to help individuals who are unemployed as the result of a major disaster. Such assistance to individuals was a new feature in the 1969 Act. Before last year, only those unemployed persons who could qualify for compensation under the normal unemployment insurance programs could receive income protection following a disaster. The two-year extension which I recommend would provide time to fully evaluate the new provisions and to consider appropriate legislation.
Housing
Hurricane Camille provided the greatest test of the Federal government's ability to provide temporary housing to victims of a major disaster. We believe we met that test; at the direction of the Office of Emergency Preparedness, the Department of Housing and Urban Development was able to place more than 5,000 mobile homes in the disaster area. We also believe, however, that the language of the law which authorizes such activities is confusing.
Two separate provisions in two different laws are now directed to temporary emergency housing. In order to simplify the legislative provisions that apply to this problem, I propose that the provisions for temporary housing in PL 81-875 be amended so that they incorporate many of the broad principles of PL 91-79, without sacrificing flexibility. A clarified version of this law would allow the government to provide temporary housing or other emergency shelter including leased mobile homes or other readily fabricated dwellings.
Debris Removal
One of the serious problems encountered in Hurricane Camille related to the removal of debris from private property. Current legislation in this area is confusing and difficult to administer. I am therefore proposing corrective legislation that would simplify and speed debris removal from private property when it is in the public interest. Again, preference would be given to local employees and contractors.
Disaster Prevention
In March and April 1969 this Administration conducted a massive flood prevention program in the upper Midwest and New England. This program--Operation Foresight--was immensely successful; it prevented widespread human suffering and an estimated $200 million in damages, at a cost of $20 million. The success of this disaster prevention effort suggests that we can do a great deal to avoid or limit the effects of expected disasters. Accordingly, I am proposing legislation which would extend the Federal government's authority to assist State and local governments in disaster prevention and damage reduction activities.
Planning Assistance
The Disaster Relief Act of 1969 authorized one-time matching grants to help States formulate better plans for coping with disasters. Almost haft of the States have already indicated that they will join us in this effort and we expect that others will soon follow their lead. I now recommend that the Congress expand this provision of the 1969 law in order to help States review and update these plans on a continuing basis.
In addition to the major initiatives outlined above, the legislation prepared by the Administration includes a number of other changes designed to extend the scope and improve the effectiveness of Federal assistance.
ADMINISTRATION ACTIONS
Legislative changes are not the only improvements which are presently required. Our experience indicates that changes in administrative procedures can be equally important in providing a more effective assistance program.
Coordination
To improve coordination of Federal Disaster Assistance efforts, both among Federal agencies and among Federal, State, and local officials, I am establishing a National Council on Federal Disaster Assistance.1The Council will be composed of senior officials from Federal agencies concerned with disaster assistance and will be chaired by the Director of the Office of Emergency Preparedness.
1The Council was established by Executive Order 11526 of April 22, 1970.
To further improve coordination of disaster assistance activities in the field, I have also directed that the Regional Directors of the Office of Emergency Preparedness be included as ad hoc members of the newly formed Federal Regional Councils. This improvement will be supplemented by other actions to improve coordination among all levels of government, including the Office of Emergency Preparedness regional planning conferences with State officials with the first such conference this month on the West Coast.
In addition to improving coordination and developing more comprehensive plans, we need better procedures for continuous communication with State and local government on such matters as disaster legislation. The Council of State Governments and such organizations as the International City Management Association, the National Association of Counties, the National League of Cities, and the United States Conference of Mayors are assisting us in this effort.
Improvements in disaster assistance also require an improved program of research and evaluation, the results of which are readily available to all who can benefit from them. I have therefore directed the Office of Emergency Preparedness to act as a central clearing house for all Federal research which is related to disasters.
Assistance to Individuals
An important objective, particularly in large-scale disasters, is that of informing individuals of the assistance which is available and of the places where it can be obtained. To meet this problem, we are expanding our information efforts and keying those efforts to the needs of the individual citizens of the community, particularly those who are poor.
Whenever a disaster occurs, those who live in the area desperately want to be in touch with their friends and relatives who live elsewhere. Rescue workers also need better communication facilities within such areas. I have therefore asked the Office of Emergency Preparedness to provide better emergency communication services to stricken regions during times of disaster.
Just as we make it easier for individuals to get information, so we should make it easier for them to get assistance. It should not be necessary for individuals to travel from one place to another and then to still another location in order to obtain the help which various agencies of the Federal government are providing. Accordingly, we are developing plans to provide "one-stop" service to individuals in disaster areas. Representatives of the principal Federal agencies and of the Red Cross, as well as caseworkers and legal advisors, will all be available at a single assistance center.
Disaster Assistance Teams
Disaster stricken communities frequently lack trained personnel who can help them make the best possible use of the assistance which is available to them from many sources. To meet this need, I have directed the Office of Emergency Preparedness to form Federal disaster assistance teams to help local communities coordinate the overall assistance effort. These teams will be supervised by a Federal Disaster Assistance Coordinator who will act as an on-the-spot representative of the President in any particular disaster area.
Disaster Insurance
Our experience with disasters in 1969 clearly demonstrated the need for expanded insurance coverage for property owners. The national flood insurance sections of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 presently permit Federal insurance assistance in flood-prone areas and we are now implementing that program on an accelerated basis. I am also directing that a comprehensive study of property insurance coverage for disaster situations be undertaken and that specific recommendations be provided me by the end of this year. This study should take into account the views of the State insurance authorities, the insurance industry, lending institutions, and the general public.
Civil Defense
The disaster assistance activities of State and local governments often are closely related to their civil defense responsibilities. The relationship between the Federal government's disaster assistance and civil defense activities should now be carefully reviewed. Accordingly, I have asked that such a study be carried out and that its recommendations be given to me by December 31, 1970. It is important that any changes in this sensitive area be made only after a careful review, one which gives special attention to the impact of any suggested change upon national security.
As we move into a new decade, one of the nation's major goals is to restore a ravaged environment. But we must also be ready to respond effectively when nature gets out of control and victimizes our citizens.
With the improvements I have recommended to the Congress and those which I aria instituting by Executive action, the disaster assistance program of the Federal government will continue to provide outstanding public service in times of crisis. This program manifests the extraordinary humanitarian spirit of our nation. The changes I have proposed would enable it to reflect that spirit even more effectively.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

April 22, 1970
Note: On the same day, the White House released a fact sheet on the proposed disaster assistance legislation and the transcript of a news briefing by George A. Lincoln, Director, Office of Emergency Preparedness, on the President's message.