Richard Nixon
April 15, 1971

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Plan for United States Participation in the World Weather Program.
To the Congress of the United States:
Through the World Weather Program, the nations of the world are combining their efforts to gain new knowledge of the global atmosphere, provide better weather forecasts and warnings to all countries, and assess the damage man has inflicted upon the earth's atmosphere.
I am pleased to report that the program is making significant progress which will enhance the comfort, health, safety and economic well-being of men everywhere:

--Satellite technology is being used with increasing effectiveness to gather global information for earlier, more accurate predictions and warnings of hazardous weather.

--New stations are being established for long-term measurement of atmospheric change.

--Computers have been programmed to determine the effect of pollution upon the atmosphere.

--A major international experiment in the Atlantic Ocean is being prepared under the Global Atmospheric Research Program. During the past year many nations, including the United States, have indicated their support of this tropical experiment and have made tentative commitments to provide ships, aircraft, satellites, anti other observing facilities. Linked with an increased computer capability to assess and integrate results, this experiment should be an important step toward attaining a true understanding of the global atmosphere.
The scientific understanding which will be developed by the World Weather Program is critical to the solution of environmental problems which are of immense concern to all nations.
Senate Concurrent Resolution 67 of the 90th Congress recognizes the importance of vigorous U.S. participation in the World Weather Program. In accordance with that resolution, I am transmitting this annual report, describing the most significant activities of the program and the planned participation of Federal agencies in the program for the coming fiscal year.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

April 15, 1971
Note: The message is printed in "World Weather Program, Plan for Fiscal Year 1972" (Government Printing Office, 29 pp. ).