Richard Nixon
April 26, 1969

Remarks at the Azalea Festival in Norfolk, Virginia.
Mr. Mayor; Your Majesty, Queen Tricia; all of the princesses in this magnificent court; Your Excellencies, the Ambassadors and other representatives of the NATO nations; Your Excellency, the Governor; distinguished guests in this wonderful audience here today:
I want you first to know that on this my first visit to Norfolk which is completely nonpolitical in character, I could not have had a greater honor than to crown my daughter the Queen of the Azalea Festival.
This is the first occasion of this type that I have participated in since assuming the Office of President, and I am glad that it was here and on this particular occasion for these reasons:
I have a special feeling for this city, because of my Navy background. The mayor told me just before the ceremony that he often had a friendly argument with the mayor of San Diego as to whether San Diego or Norfolk was the Navy capital of the United States.
Well, at least when I am in Norfolk, Norfolk is the naval capital of the United States.
And then I am honored to be here because you not only have honored my daughter, but you have honored these other lovely princesses. I think you will agree with me that any one of them could be the queen of this festival. They are all really queens as well as princesses.
And finally, on a serious note, I am glad the day is a beautiful day, and that the azaleas are in such magnificent, full bloom with all their beauty.
I would point out to this great assembly that this festival which now is in its 16th year, is one that reminds us of a great truth. It is a festival which celebrates beauty but at the same time celebrates freedom.
I think all of us as Americans, and all of us as members of the NATO community of free nations, realize that only in freedom can we truly enjoy the fullness of beauty.
We see beauty around us, but NATO-that great alliance of free nations--makes it possible for us as Americans to enjoy beauty with freedom.
Let us always be thankful for that great truth.
And, finally, I will make no other comments on the great problems confronting the world. I will only say that on my recent trip to Europe, to the NATO nations--to some of them--that I met queens, prime ministers, ambassadors, admirals, and generals, and the conversation was always on the great subjects of weighty discussion among nations.
Now here, what do we find? A queen, together with 15 princesses, a Governor, a mayor, admirals, generals. And what do we discuss? We very appropriately discuss beauty--the beauty of this place, of the Azalea Festival.
I am honored to be here for that kind of meeting and that kind of discussion.
Thank you very much for allowing me to participate.
Note: The President spoke at 3 p.m. at the Amphitheater in the Azalea Gardens in Norfolk, Va. The mayor of Norfolk was Roy B. Martin, Jr., and the Governor of Virginia was Mills E. Godwin, Jr.
The festival is sponsored annually by the city of Norfolk and the Norfolk Chamber of Commerce in tribute to the naval command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization located there. The princesses represented each of the NATO nations.