Richard Nixon
April 21, 1971

Memorandum About Women in Government.
Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
As you know, it has been my desire to attract the ablest and most talented people in the country to join this Administration and assist in the achievement of our far-reaching goals. The Nation's many highly qualified women represent an important reservoir of ability and talent that we must draw on to a greater degree. In this Administration we have firmly espoused the rights of women, and we must now clearly demonstrate our recognition of the equality of women by making greater use of their skills in high level positions.
Our efforts to date in appointing women have offered some encouragement. I have appointed a number of women to top posts and have named more than 200 to Presidential Advisory Boards and Commissions. However, I am convinced that we can and must do better.
To this end, I am now directing that you take the following actions:

--Develop and put into action a plan for attracting more qualified women to top appointive positions (GS-16 and up through Presidential appointees) in your Department or Agency by the end of this calendar year. This plan should be submitted to me by May 15.

--Develop and put into action by May 15 a plan for significantly increasing the number of women, career and appointive, in mid-level positions (GS-13 to 15). This plan should directly involve your top personnel official.

--Ensure that substantial numbers of the vacancies on your Advisory Boards and Committees are filled with well-qualified women.

--Designate an overall coordinator who will be held responsible for the success of this project. Please provide this name to me by May 15.
I have asked my Special Assistant, Fred Malek, to meet with each of you individually to review further the requirements of this project and to offer his assistance in locating highly qualified women candidates for top positions.
I intend to follow personally the results of this project; I look forward to your giving it the fullest degree of cooperation. It is important not only in terms of opening new opportunities for women, but also as a means of making the fullest possible use of talents that are needed in the Nation's service.
RICHARD NIXON
Note: On April 22, 1971, the White House released an announcement of the appointment of Barbara H. Franklin as Staff Assistant for Executive Manpower with emphasis on recruitment of women into the Administration.