Richard Nixon
April 10, 1969

Joint Statement Following Discussions With King Hussein I of Jordan.
H.M. KING HUSSEIN, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, visited Washington at President Nixon's invitation April 8, 9, and 10. During this time, His Majesty and members of his delegation had friendly and constructive discussions on matters of mutual interest and common concern with the President, the Secretaries of State and Defense and other senior United States Government officials.
The principal topic of the discussion was the common United States and Jordanian desire for a just and durable peace in the Middle East. The United States informed the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan of its efforts, bilateral and multilateral, to help bring about peace in the Middle East.
H.M. the King explained that the explosive nature of the situation in the Middle East is caused by the continued occupation of Jordanian and other Arab territories, and expressed his conviction that peace can only be achieved by the early withdrawal of the forces of occupation in the context of the Security Council Resolution of November 22, 1967.
For its part, the United States called to the attention of the Government of Jordan and reaffirmed the statement made by Secretary Rogers on this point and on other points before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on March 27.
Both the United States and Jordan reaffirmed their strong support for Ambassador Jarring's mission and for all the principles and provisions of the Security Council Resolution. Both Governments recognize the compelling need to seek actively a just and lasting peace in the area.
The United States reaffirmed its support for the political independence and territorial integrity of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
The discussions renewed and deepened the close and friendly relations which exist between the two countries.
His Majesty the King extended an invitation to President Nixon to visit the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. The President expressed his gratitude for the invitation and said he hoped to be able to make this visit at an appropriate time.
Note: Gunnar Jarring was Swedish Ambassador to the Soviet Union and United Nations mediator in the Middle East dispute.