Richard Nixon
August 03, 1969

Remarks on Arrival at Mildenhall Air Force Base, England.
Mr. Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen:
I wish to express to you, Mr. Prime Minister, my grateful appreciation for those very warm words of welcome, and to tell you that though this is but a brief stop, I welcome the opportunity that is provided to talk with you again about some of the problems that we mutually face in the world, and to discuss them in the context of the trip that I am now bringing to a conclusion.
You have graciously mentioned the adventure which took three Americans to the vicinity of the moon, and two to step on the moon. I found that as I traveled all over the world, in every nation, whether it was in Asia or in Eastern Europe, this was uppermost in the minds of all people, leaders and people that I met from all walks of life.
I think that in this is perhaps a lesson for all of us. There are differences that divide the world today--very deep differences. But as we saw very dramatically and very movingly in Bucharest today and yesterday, those things which unite men and women in the world are much stronger than those which divide us.
I can assure all who are listening to me now that while the path to peace may seem very difficult, and preserving the peace is, of course, a task which we have found to be tremendously arduous and hazardous over these past few years, that the people of the world deep in their hearts want peace.
They are on the side of peace. That is the message that comes from all over Asia; it comes from Eastern Europe; and I sense it again as I step here on British soil.
It is the responsibility of leaders--leaders like those that I had the privilege of meeting on this trip, leaders, Mr. Prime Minister, like yourself--it is our responsibility to develop those policies that will reflect the deep yearning of people to be together rather than apart, to communicate rather than being denied the opportunity to know each other.
It is this great goal to which we are dedicated.
I believe that this trip may have served a useful purpose in bringing us closer to that goal. I am confident that our conversations will also further that purpose as they have in the past.
Finally, I say again, it is always a great privilege to come here, to be welcomed here on British soil, and I can only say that I wish my stay were longer but there will be another day. On this occasion, at least, for this one hour, we can talk about the world and perhaps develop some constructive thoughts that would further that cause of peace to which we are all so deeply dedicated.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 6:29 p.m. in response to remarks of welcome by Prime Minister Harold Wilson, which follow:
Mr. President, it is a very real pleasure for me to welcome you and Mrs. Nixon this evening as you touch down on British soil, currently here in a very real sense Anglo-American soil, at the last stage of a round-the-world tour which I hope you, Mr. President, feel has been as rewarding as it has been arduous, and which, when its full implications have been worked out, may well prove to have been historic.
While your mind must be teeming, Mr. President, with the accumulated thoughts of your talks and your welcome in seven different countries, I am sure that even these will not have displaced your memory of seeing the splashdown after the momentous and successful Apollo mission.
This evening gives me the opportunity to extend to you, and this time without the aid of a hot line, the congratulations of Her Majesty's Government and of the whole British people on what has been achieved.
Meanwhile, and immediately, you, Mr. President, and I seek to make the maximum use of the short time that you are here with us. While we have kept in the closest touch since your visit in February, I look forward to this chance of hearing from you, firsthand, your first impressions of your discussions on your world tour; equally, to exchange views on the subjects of our informal agenda, for both of us are conscious of the possible developments, challenges, and opportunities that lie ahead as we pursue our common tasks together.