Richard Nixon
August 14, 1970

Remarks on Arrival in New Orleans, Louisiana.
MRS. NIXON and I want to express our great appreciation to all of you for this wonderfully warm welcome. To Al Hirt and Pete Fountain, how about a hand for them?
We've had Al at the White House. Pete, you've got to come too. We also want you to know that we have been deeply moved by the reception we have received as we have come to New Orleans. We remember our previous visits here and on this particular occasion, I simply want to remind this wonderful crowd that this is a special day in the history of the United States.
Twenty-five years ago was VJ Day. I wonder if all of you can remember that day. I was in New York with my wife in Times Square. The war was over. And I think all of us today, if we had one great thought on our mind, it is to bring peace, but a peace that will last, and that is what we are working for in Washington.
I also want you to know that this is the 25th State that I have visited since becoming President of the United States. And over these past 18 months, it is a great experience for me to go to America.
I recall that in the history books it tells us that when the Louisiana Purchase was made in 1803, that Thomas Jefferson and others said that it was necessary for the new young country to think continentally, and, of course, now that America is a continent, I find that we tend to think too much sectionally, that what really happens is that those of us in Washington sometimes become isolated from the rest of the; country.
That is why I have this program, one, which instead of just sitting in Washington waiting for the people to come there we are bringing the White House to all over the country. And now it is right here in Washington, D.C. [New Orleans, Louisiana].
We are going to discuss several problems with leaders of this State and leaders of the South, domestic problems, foreign problems.
But there is one thing that I want to say with regard to this special day. Coming down on the airplane were Members of the House and a Member of the Senate and I have been met here by another Member of the House.
It happens that the entire delegation from the State of Louisiana are members of the Democratic Party. I happen to be in the other party. But I want to say this: that when I look at the record of the members of the delegation from the State of Louisiana, whether they be in the House or the Senate, that when it comes to the great issue of building a strong United States and those policies that will build a just peace, they do not think of themselves as Democrats, but as Americans first, and that is the kind of policy that we need in America today.
And so to all of them who have supported us from this State, we are grateful; to those of you in this State who have given support to us on those great international issues that are bigger than parties, because they are as big as this whole country, our deep appreciation.
And one last thing. My wife and I were here for the first time 29 years ago. And I remember how we were moved by the wonderful food and the good music, but most of all by the warmth of the hospitality.
This is a good city and it is a warm and friendly, hospitable city. May it always be that way for a President or for somebody that was nothing, as I was 29 years ago.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 12:45 p.m. at the Royal Orleans Hotel.