Richard Nixon
August 27, 1969

Remarks on the Arrival in California of Former President and Mrs. Johnson.
WE ARE here, as I know all of you know, for a very, special occasion. We are going into the redwoods to dedicate a park.
And I think it is most significant that in the whole history of this country there has perhaps been no First Lady who, in the field of beautification and in the field of dedication to the conservation of the natural beauty of our country, has done more than Lady Bird Johnson--Mrs. Johnson.
We are here to dedicate these magnificent redwoods to Mrs. Johnson under the name of Lady Bird Johnson Grove.
But also we are here, it happens by coincidence, on another day. It happens that President Johnson and I have several things in common. We both were born in small towns. We both served in the House. We both served in the Senate of the United States. We both served as Vice President, and we have both served as President of the United States. And we both are very fortunate in the fact, we think, that we married above ourselves to Mrs. Johnson and Mrs. Nixon.
But also today, I know you want to join us in wishing President Johnson a happy birthday. This is his 61st birthday. How about that !
[At this point, "Happy Birthday" was sung to former 'President Johnson.]
This is President Johnson's first visit to this part of California; I know that you would all like to hear from him.
PRESIDENT JOHNSON. Mr. President and Mrs. Nixon, Governor Reagan, Congressman Clausen, Senator Murphy:
I want to express the appreciation of the Johnson family to the President and the First Lady for their generosity and their thoughtfulness today.
Since the President has let out how old I am, I just want to say that I don't know of any one of the 61 birthdays that I have had where I have been happier or where people have done more to try to make me happy. When you come to a good congressional district, a beautiful place in a beautiful State and a beautiful land, you are naturally appreciative.
When the President and the First Lady of the United States recognize and honor the work of what I believe to be a great woman, that is the best birthday present I could have.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 3 p.m. at Arcata Airport in Eureka, Calif., where he and Mrs. Nixon greeted former President and Mrs. Johnson prior to their flight to Redwood National Park for the dedication of the Lady Bird Johnson Grove.
The remarks were released at Arcata Airport in Eureka, Calif.