Richard Nixon
August 08, 1969

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Chancellor Kiesinger of Germany.
PRESIDENT NIXON and Chancellor Kiesinger issued the following joint statement at the conclusion of their meeting at the White House on August 8:
The President and Chancellor Kiesinger are very pleased to have had the opportunity to meet together during the past two days and to continue their personal consultations on important issues which they had begun during President Nixon's visit to Germany in February. They agreed that the meetings just concluded were extremely useful. They were characterized by an atmosphere of warm friendship and mutual confidence which is an important element in relations between the United States of America and the Federal Republic of Germany.
During their meetings President Nixon and Chancellor Kiesinger agreed on the importance of staying in close communication with one another. In order to assure that they will be able to communicate rapidly in case of emergency, the President and the Chancellor have agreed to the establishment of a "hot line" between the White House and the Chancellor's office. The line will be installed as soon as technical arrangements are completed.
The Chancellor and the President exchanged views on the international situation. In particular, they discussed the full range of issues affecting relations between East and West, including prospects for strategic arms limitation talks and broadening discussions on European security. They agreed on the desirability of continuing efforts to bring existing international conflicts to a just end, to achieve progress toward disarmament and to seek to eliminate the causes of tensions in Europe. The President and the Chancellor agreed that negotiations to this end are desirable. The Chancellor welcomed the opportunity for full consultation in NATO on the strategic arms limitation talks and on issues affecting European security. The president assured the Chancellor that the United States would take full account of the interests of its Allies in the strategic arms limitation talks. They were of the opinion that progress in strategic arms limitation is interrelated with a climate favorable for dealing with long-existing European problems.
President Nixon took the opportunity during the meetings to give Chancellor Kiesinger a detailed account of the impressions he gained during his recent trip to Asia and Romania.
Chancellor Kiesinger reported on developments in Berlin and Germany which have occurred since the last meeting between the Chancellor and the President. Chancellor Kiesinger and President Nixon share the hope that the Soviet Union will respond in a constructive manner to the tripartite initiative aimed at improving the situation in and around Berlin and between the two parts of Germany. President Nixon expressed his strong support of the efforts of the Federal Republic of Germany to alleviate the hardships that result from the division of Germany.
The Chancellor and the President reaffirmed their conviction that the North Atlantic Alliance is an essential instrument in the maintenance of peace and stability in the North Atlantic area. They agreed that the proposed NATO committee on the challenges of modern society would add a new dimension to the Alliance and give it a direct part in the challenging task of marshalling resources of member nations to improve the quality of life for all people.
The President and the Chancellor welcomed the recently-concluded offset agreement between the United States and the Federal Republic which they regarded as symbolic of the determination of the two governments to cooperate in the maintenance of a sound defense posture within the necessary framework of economic stability.
The Chancellor and the President expressed satisfaction over the agreement envisioned on Special Drawing Rights which is one important step to an orderly development of the international monetary system. The President and the Chancellor are confident that agreement on SDR's will facilitate the continued advance of world trade and investment. President Nixon outlined his Government's resolve to bring inflation under control and to strengthen the position of the dollar as a world currency. In the interest of international trade and monetary developments, the Chancellor and the President agreed on the continued necessity of maintaining closest cooperation between the United States and Germany. Both opposed additional barriers to international trade.
Chancellor Kiesinger reported to the President on recent developments in the European Community and on prospects for future development. The President affirmed that the United States has consistently supported European unity, and expressed his conviction that European nations will move forward in a way which will meet their interests and at the same time .contribute to an international climate of cooperation and prosperity.
On the subject of bilateral technological cooperation, the President and the Chancellor welcomed the progress made, especially in the field of space research, where the joint Project Helios is of great importance. They agreed to continue and to widen this cooperation.
The Chancellor extended the invitation to the astronauts of Apollo 11 to visit Germany as his guests in the near future.
At the conclusion of their talks the President and the Chancellor expressed their renewed conviction that the close understanding and harmony of interests between the United States and the Federal Republic provide a sound basis for continuing constructive cooperation between the two countries and, beyond that, constitute a very important element of strength in the search for the resolution of international problems and the achievement of a just and lasting peace to which both countries are dedicated.