Richard Nixon
August 22, 1969

Remarks on the Departure of President Park of South Korea.
WELL, Mr. President, as we complete our talks, I wish to express appreciation to you for coming to the United States and for giving me the benefit of your views, not only on the relations between our two countries, but also on United States policy generally in the Pacific and in the Asian area.
I have found these talks most helpful. And I am sure that not only are we going to continue to have the relations, the good relations, we have had in the past between the Republic of Korea and the United States, but that U.S. understanding of the great forces now at play in Asia, forces that will shape the future for the last third of this century, that that understanding has been increased as a result of having the benefit of your views.
And finally, I want to say that I look forward, during my term of office, at some time of returning to Korea and of visiting your country again and of seeing you and Mrs. Park again at that time.
Note: The President spoke at 10:50 a.m. at the St. Francis Hotel in San Francisco, Calif.
President Chung Hee Park responded as follows:
I wish to take this opportunity once again to express my most sincere appreciation to President and Mrs. Nixon for their cordial invitation and also to express my wholehearted appreciation for the warm welcome which has been extended by the President and Mrs. Nixon and the citizens of the United States.
During my talks with President Nixon, and the talks between our ministers concerned, we have been able to exchange most candid views of the matters of mutual concern and interest. I am very pleased and satisfied with the conference and discussion we have had so far. And I am sure this meeting will even further strengthen the cordial and amicable relationship which we have enjoyed in the past. I am very glad that President Nixon has accepted my invitation to visit the Republic of Korea, where I could have the opportunity to reciprocate the hospitality that we have been accorded during our visit here in San Francisco.
And I hope that you gentlemen here would also accompany President Nixon when he visits Korea and we would like to reciprocate the courtesy to you also. Thank you very much.