Richard Nixon
August 09, 1969

Statement on Announcing the Nomination of Mrs. Helen D. Bentley as a Member of the Federal Maritime Commission.
IN NOMINATING Helen Bentley as a member of the Federal Maritime Commission, I am conscious of the fact that in one way at least, this nomination is unique.
Mrs. Bentley has earned a very strong position for herself in what most of us would feel to be "a man's world"--the world of maritime affairs. As maritime editor of the Baltimore Sun, she has won the respect of all segments, labor and management alike, in this field and has established a record of professional excellence unsurpassed by any maritime expert in the country.
Although we are at the beginning of the age of space, it is good to be reminded that the United States is a sea power, a nation that has grown and prospered over the years because of our maritime trade with every corner of the earth and because our ports have been recognized as some of the best in the world.
Helen Bentley knows the world of maritime trade. She has not only reported it from a desk at the Baltimore Sun, she has traveled all over the world to the great seaports, she has sailed on ships and learned much of their operations at first hand. She knows that maritime trade, which has played such an important part in the development of civilization in ages past, is still an important area today.
She knows--perhaps better than anyone else--the complex and profoundly important world of the sea and its influence on the strength and growth of our Nation.
Although Mrs. Bentley is well aware that she is being nominated to this post solely on her very considerable merits as a maritime expert, it would be less than candid of me not to say how gratified I am to be able to nominate a woman to such an important position.
There was once a time when, I suppose, there was a bit of condescension involved in appointing a woman to an important position. That day is gone. Mrs. Bentley is representative of the extremely well-qualified women we have been able to bring into Government service. As a knowledgeable lady in a man's world, she has gained a reputation for being the best there is. That, in the long run, is what we are looking for in any position, and I am doubly glad that in Mrs. Bentley we find that the best there is also just happens to be a charming and wonderful lady.
And now I would like to add one important point: Upon Mrs. Bentley's confirmation by the Senate, it is my intention to designate her as Chairman of the Maritime Commission.
Note: Mrs. Bentley was confirmed by the Senate as a member of the Commission on October 3, 1969. On October 6 she was designated by the President as Chairman of the Commission, and the oath of office was officially administered to her by Commission Secretary Thomas Lisi on October 10. On October 27 Mrs. Bentley was ceremonially sworn in by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew.
A White House announcement, released with the President's statement, contains biographical details concerning Mrs. Bentley. It is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, p. 1113).