Richard Nixon
December 07, 1970

Special Message to the Congress Requesting 45-Day Extension of No-Strike Period in Railway Labor-Management Dispute
To the Congress of the United States:
After much effort at settlement through negotiation and mediation, we are confronted with an emergency stemming from a dispute between railway carriers and four unions representing their employees. The unions involved have declared their intention of calling a nationwide strike starting at 12 :01 a.m., December 10, 1970.
All existing governmental procedures have been carefully but vainly used to bring about a settlement of the dispute. Negotiations among the parties, based upon the recommendations of the Emergency Board, have progressed during the last 30 days. However, because of the number of parties and the complexity of the issues involved, these negotiations have not resulted in an agreed-upon resolution. At my direction, the Secretary of Labor has sought from the parties a voluntary extension of negotiations without strike or lockout, but he has not been successful.
A nationwide stoppage of rail service would cause hardship to all Americans and harm to the economy, particularly a stoppage at the height of the pre-Christmas season.
It is essential that our railroads continue to operate. Therefore, I recommend that the Congress extend for 45 days the period during which no work stoppage may occur. It is my hope that these additional 45 days will lead to a voluntary negotiated settlement of this dispute.
In requesting an extension to January 23, 1971, I am mindful of the fact that the current Congressional session is fast drawing to a close and there are many other pressing and important matters to be dealt with. Under these circumstances, it would not seem advisable to thrust upon the Congress at this time the consideration of the complicated substantive issues of this dispute.
The fact that some progress has been made in negotiations is encouraging, and it indicates that the parties may be able to resolve their differences. However, if no settlement is reached within this time period, I shall make additional recommendations to the Congress.

I urge that Congress act quickly on my proposal so that a crippling stoppage can be averted, and so that the nation's travelers and shippers can depend on uninterrupted service.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

December 7, 1970
Note: Emergency Board 178, created by Executive Orders 11558 and 11559 on September 18, 1970, to investigate the dispute between railway carriers and four unions representing their employees, submitted its report to the President on November 9.
On September 18 the White House released the transcript of a news briefing on the railway labor dispute by W. J. Usery, Jr., Assistant Secretary for Labor-Management Relations, Department of Labor.