Richard Nixon
December 06, 1969

Remarks With Arkansas Coach Frank Broyles.
THE PRESIDENT. It is an honor to be here with a great team.
MR. BROYLES. Thank you, sir. We are proud and we feel that way, too.
THE PRESIDENT. I would like to say something to the team, because I know how you feel.
In my field of politics, I have lost some close ones and I have won some close ones. But I want you to know that in the 100th year of football, in the game to prove Which was to be Number 1, we couldn't have had a greater game. Arkansas was magnificent throughout the game, and Texas, in order to win, had to beat a great team.
On any Saturday, if we were to make a bet, I would say we wouldn't know which team to choose, whether it would be Arkansas or Texas.
I also want you to know this: I think you can be awfully proud of the way your fans are with you. I have never seen stands so full of life. The whole State was behind you. There was a spirit there about it, Coach, and that means that your team has done something that is really great for this State.
MR. BROYLES. Thank you, sir. We are very proud of our fans. They have had a big part in the success that we have had.
But we are doubly proud that you are a big sports fan and believe in our program across the State. This will mean a lot to football for years to come.
THE PRESIDENT. I know how the fellows feel, being right down there on that 8-yard line, ready to go over, and then losing the game after what they have done. But I do know this, that in that Sugar Bowl, watch out.
BILL FLEMMING [ABC Sports]. Mr. President, this has been, of course, the climax of the centennial year of college football, and we, indeed, are very indebted to you, sir, for not only taking your television set to your dentist so you could watch a college game, but also being here at this final game.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I wouldn't have missed it. I am only sorry that both teams couldn't have won.
Thank you, fellows.
Note: The President visited the Arkansas locker room at 3:15 p.m. at Razorback Stadium, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Ark.