Richard Nixon
February 26, 1970

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
To the Congress of the United States:
It is with a sense of gratification that I transmit to the Congress the Ninth Annual Report of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
The events of the past year have shown that through negotiation we can move toward the control of armaments in a manner that will bring a greater measure of security than we can obtain from arms alone.
There is reason to be hopeful of the possibility that an understanding can be reached with the Soviet Union which will permit both nations to reduce the burden and danger of competitive development of strategic arms.
The process has begun. The preliminary, exploratory phase of the Strategic Arms Limitations Talks was held in Helsinki in November and December. Ambassador Gerard Smith, the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, whom I named to head our delegation to the Talks, reported to me that the exchange of views was serious and augured well for the next phase to begin in Vienna in April.
We have undertaken these negotiations because it is in our interest to do so. We believe the Soviet Union recognizes a similar interest. In addition, continuing technological advances in weapons systems give warning that delay will only complicate the arduous task of achieving agreements.
The other nations of the world are looking to the United States and the Soviet Union to limit and reduce our strategic arsenals. I believe that a verifiable agreement which will limit arms on both sides will in fact enhance mutual security.
The report which I now send to you describes the contribution of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to the preparation for, and the conduct of negotiations on strategic arms limitation. The report also describes efforts in pursuit of other arms control measures directed to controlling chemical warfare and bacteriological research, to bringing the nonproliferation treaty into effect and to banning nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction from the seabed.
In transmitting this report, I reaffirm my Administration's concern with the substance rather than the rhetoric of arms control. Wherever possible, consistent with our national security, I want our talents, our energies and our wealth to be dedicated, not to destruction, but to improving the quality of life for all our people.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

February 26, 1970
Note: The 90-page report covers the period January 1 through December 31, 1969.