Richard Nixon
February 05, 1971

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual. Report of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
To the Congress of the United States:
In transmitting this Fifth Annual Report of the National Endowment for the Humanities, I commend to your attention the work supported by the Endowment during fiscal year 1970 in increasing the cultural resources of our nation and in providing insight into and understanding of the complexities of contemporary problems.
The National Endowment for the Humanities, which is one of the two Endowments comprising the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities, has been able in its short existence to implement a wide variety of programs designed to promote progress and scholarship in the humanities through studies in history, language, literature, jurisprudence, philosophy, and related fields. In addition a major emphasis has been a heightened concern with human values as they bear on social conditions underlying the most difficult and far-reaching of the nation's domestic problems, such as divisions between races and generations.
With its positive response to my proposal of last year to increase funding for the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities, the Congress enabled the Endowment to make a significantly greater contribution to the quality of life for all Americans. The role of government in this area, as I emphasized last year, should be one of stimulating private giving and encouraging private initiative. I am therefore happy to report that the work of the National Endowment for the Humanities attracted 125 gifts from private sources totalling over $2 million during fiscal year 1970, more than matching Federal funds available for that purpose.
It is my hope that the 92nd Congress will recognize the innovative and vital role of the National Endowment for the Humanities as described in this Fifth Annual Report.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

February 5, 1971
Note: The 107-page report is entitled "National Endowment for the Humanities, Fifth Annual Report."