Richard Nixon
February 21, 1972

Statement on Signing a Bill To Arbitrate Settlement of the West Coast Dock Strike.
THE SECRETARY of Labor has informed me today that an agreement has now been reached in the west coast dock strike and the workers have returned to their jobs.
While this contract will still be subject to approval by the Pay Board, the entire Nation can be gratified by the willingness of the parties to settle their differences voluntarily. For thousands of Americans whose livelihoods have been threatened, this strike has been a painful experience and its end is most welcome.
For several days, I have delayed action on S.J. Res. 197, a bill to end the strike by arbitration, in the hope that the pending legislation would encourage the parties to reach a voluntary accord. Today, as this legislation takes effect with my signature, I am pleased to note that the arbitration machinery will no longer be needed.
I must point out, however, that our agenda on transportation strikes is not yet clear. Repeatedly over the past 2 years I have urged the Congress to act on a comprehensive measure to avoid future strikes of this kind, and yet the Crippling Strikes Prevention Act still awaits action. The Congress did approve special legislation for this west coast strike, and I appreciate the significance of that action. The other shoe must now drop, however, or the Nation can only hobble into the future.
Note: The statement was released at Peking, People's Republic of China, where the President signed the bill. As enacted, S.J. Res. 197 is Public Law 92-235 (86 Stat. 40).
On the same day, the White House released the transcript of a news briefing by Secretary of Labor James D. Hodgson on the act and on the agreement reached in the dock strike.
On February 7, 1972, the White House released a statement by Secretary Hodgson on a proposed settlement of the dock strike. On February 8, the White House released the transcript of a news briefing by Secretary Hodgson on further progress toward settlement of the strike.