Richard Nixon
February 09, 1971

Remarks at a Reception for the Freedoms Foundation.
I WANT to express my apologies to all of you for delaying this appearance for just a few minutes, but I had a telephone call, a very important one. I didn't make a telephone call to the moon, but I was talking to the astronauts out in the Pacific. They are back and back safely. I talked to all three of them.
And I just want you to know that after talking to them I think it is most appropriate to come to meet with the trustees of the Freedoms Foundation, because they stand for what is very best in freedom and for America, our three astronauts.
I pointed out to all of them that at the diplomatic reception last night where the ambassadors, the chiefs of mission, from 116 countries were here, that all of them spoke of the astronauts and how much they admired what they had done because bravery, that kind of technical ability, is something that transcends political differences or geographical differences or national differences.
And I was certainly very proud, as the President of the United States, to receive the congratulations of these heads of foreign governments.

I think all of you should know, and I am sure you do know, that when these men do return home they not only come here, at the White House where we have a dinner for them; that this year we are having them and their wives and their children go to spend a night or a weekend at Camp David, which would be interesting. And then--I hope it is still there when we get back.
But anyway, I told Captain Shepard that Arnie Palmer wants him to go on the tour now. And I also will replace the golf ball that he hit off into outer space with one of the Presidential golf balls.
But I think that what I particularly want to leave with this group here is that Freedoms Foundation, an organization that all of you have supported and do support so loyally, is one that I have known for many, many years. I knew it from the time that I was Vice President of the United States and I remember Mrs. Nixon and I went up to Valley Forge for a presentation in the barn.
I also know that through the years that I have been Vice President, so many of the award winners have come to my office then, and then as President I have been honored to receive them in the Cabinet Room and in the President's office.
I realize that this organization could not exist except for the contributions and for the work, all volunteer work, of just thousands of people across the country.
I am deeply grateful for all that you have done. I speak in personal terms only because representing, as I do, the Government of this country, which is a government with many billions of dollars at its disposal and many, many programs, the result of those expenditures of money, I realize that what people do in their individual capacity is what makes America great.
What we have done for almost 200 years--and we have done much in the world, many good things for America at home, we have become the richest country, the strongest country in the world, with more freedom, more opportunity than any people in the world--and what we have been able to do in the world where, in the wars that we have had to fight and one that we are now bringing to an end as far as we are concerned, everything that we have done in the world, that all of this has been possible because of what the American people have created here in this country.
But when we look at the progress of America, how we got where we are, we, of course, got there in great part because of what we did as a government. But we must never forget that the greatness of America, and this is what really distinguishes this country, is primarily because of what we have done as a people in our individual and private capacity.
Freedoms Foundation stands for that principle. You recognize the necessity of strengthening freedom, strengthening it at all levels in America. You work for that. You reward it. You encourage it.
And because you do that, I am very delighted to receive you, along with Mrs. Nixon, here in the White House, to tell you to enjoy your stay here. And even though it has been delayed a little, I understand the coffee and the tea will be warmed up when you get over to the State Dining Room. I can urge you also to try the pastries. I don't use them. That is how I keep my figure.
But nevertheless, I hope you brought your bowser bags because there is plenty for those who may not use them all. And I know that you will enjoy it.
Now I understand Bo Callaway has something that he wants to say. And so, Bo, you are recognized under the one minute rule of the House.
[At this point, after making brief remarks, Howard H. Callaway, chairman of the board of trustees of the Freedoms Foundation at Valley Forge, presented the President with a gavel and sounding board. The President then resumed speaking.]
Thank you very much, Bo.
It is, of course, a very great honor to have this in the collection of gavels that I have acquired through the years because I have acquired them because I presided over the Senate for 8 years and every time anybody came to visit me, of course, as a head of state or something, he always gave me a gavel.
So I have another one now. And I was thinking how this would do a little better than the others. Do you think it would work in the Senate today?
I, too, appreciate the fact, the historic significance of the wood from which the gavel is made and also the base is made. And in this room in which one of the few original paintings, a painting that is older than this house, the painting of George Washington appears--this one, I understand, is not that old---but to have it in this room, the East Room, which is really the room which I would say would be known as the Washington Room, if we were to pick a man's name for it, and to have this from Valley Forge, is indeed a very great honor.
I again want to say we thank you for what you have done and what you are going to do. It is a good work. It is for the best interests of America and I want to be just as helpful as I can, in an honorary or any other way.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 5:37 p.m. in the East Room at the White House to members of the Foundation's "Committee of One Thousand."
The gavel and sounding board, made from an oak beam taken from beneath the floor of the camp hospital at Valley Forge where Colonials were treated during the winter encampment of 1777 and 1778, was inscribed: "The President of the United States, Richard Milhous Nixon, installed as Honorary Chairman, Freedoms Foundation at Valley Forge, February 9, 1971 ."
Mr. Callaway's remarks are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 7, p. 207).