Richard Nixon
January 04, 1971

Statement Announcing Increase in Disaster Relief Assistance for Pakistan
THE AFTERMATH of the disaster that struck East Pakistan over a month ago continues to be a matter of deep concern. It was probably the worst natural disaster of this century, if not of recorded history, and the survivors still need help. As part of an international effort, this Government has contributed substantially to meeting initial emergency relief requirements. So far the United States has provided over $9 million in emergency relief assistance, including food, clothing, medical supplies, and associated transport and delivery services. U.S. helicopters in East Pakistan have airlifted over a million pounds of supplies directly to the disaster area.
Now that the immediate emergency requirements have been met, we are turning our full attention to sustaining the lives of the disaster victims and to aid them to once again lead productive lives.
Many of the survivors have lost virtually all of their possessions. Unless given the means to provide for themselves and to protect themselves, they may yet perish. Hundreds of thousands of tons of food grains have also been lost, and unless there is substantial help from abroad, there will be an even greater human tragedy in East Pakistan.
In response to appeals from the Government of Pakistan and the Secretary General of the United Nations, I am today announcing that the United States is increasing its grant of food grain to Pakistan to 200,000 metric tons as part of a major international effort. I hope that other countries, especially those in a position to provide rice, will join us in helping to feed the survivors until they are able to plant and harvest another crop.
Much more remains to be done, and we are committed to do what we can over the longer term to assist in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the devastated area. The Agency for International Development, in its continuing work in Pakistan, will devote special attention in collaboration with the Government of Pakistan to meeting these longer term requirements. The U.S. voluntary agencies, who have already responded to the initial emergency needs, will also continue to serve long after the initial shock of the cyclones and floods has passed.
In this connection, I call the attention of all Americans to the campaign, which the privately organized Pakistan Relief Committee of prominent Americans will be pressing, to raise funds for use by the U.S. voluntary agencies operating in East Pakistan. If given the means, these organizations can help save the survivors by providing indispensable rehabilitation assistance in the form of such necessities as building materials to replace demolished homes and villages, seeds to grow new crops, farming tools for planting and harvesting, and cooking utensils.
Helping those in need is a deeply rooted American tradition, and I am sure that Americans will respond generously to the needs of the disaster-struck people of Pakistan.