Richard Nixon
January 07, 1972

Remarks on Departure of Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan From the Western White House.
Mr. Prime Minister and ladies and gentlemen:

We have just concluded a series of meetings in which the Prime Minister and I have had a far-ranging and very comprehensive discussion of a number of issues.
I think it can be safely said that this is the most comprehensive discussion which has ever taken place between the Prime Minister of Japan and the President of the United States. It has also been a very constructive discussion, as will be indicated by the press statement which will be jointly issued, and also by the statements that will be made after this meeting by the Prime Minister.
We have found that on many major issues we have substantial agreement. What this meeting particularly has brought home to the Prime Minister and to me is that there is what I would term a natural interdependence between Japan and the United States. We both are nations of the Pacific. We are nations who have the responsibility for peace in the Pacific, and peace in the Pacific, of course, is indispensable if we are to have peace in the world.
I should point out that this is the last of a series of meetings that I have had with major free world leaders. The fact that it was the last one gave the Prime Minister and me an opportunity to discuss the results of the previous meetings, and also to particularly concentrate on problems of the Pacific area, in which we have a common interest.
Then, finally, what was different and significant about this meeting was that it was the first occasion that I was honored to have the head of state, the head of government of another country, on a state visit as a guest in my home. That, of course, tells us something about the very close relationship between Japan and the United States, and between the Prime Minister of Japan and the President of the United States and our colleagues who are standing here beside me.
So with that, Mr. Prime Minister, we thank you for coming so far for these talks. We know that they will contribute to peace in the Pacific and we wish you well on your return journey to Tokyo.
Note: The President spoke at 1:30 p.m. at the Western White House in San Clemente, Calif. He spoke without referring to notes.
Following the President's remarks, Prime Minister Sato spoke in Japanese. His remarks were translated by an interpreter as follows:
I wish to express my heartfelt appreciation for the opportunity given me to renew my long, personal friendship with President Nixon during the 2-day talks with him. I am confident that these meetings have contributed to strengthen the unshakable relationship of mutual trust and interdependence between the peoples of the United States and Japan.
On behalf of the Japanese delegation, I would like to express my sincere thanks for the warm hospitality extended to us by President Nixon.
I would also like to extend to President Nixon my best wishes for his health, and hope that his forthcoming visits to Peking and Moscow will bring about fruitful achievements for the peace and prosperity of the world.
I thank you.
On January 6, 1972, the President greeted Prime Minister Sato in a ceremony at the Western White House and hosted a working dinner for the Prime Minister that evening.