Richard Nixon
January 30, 1969

Remarks Announcing a Goodwill Tour to Western Europe by Col. Frank Borman, USAF.
Ladies and gentlemen:
These three men who stand with me need no introduction. [The President re[erred to the Apollo 8 astronauts: Col. Frank Borman, USAF; Capt. James A. Lovell, Jr., USN; and Lt. Col. William A. Anders, USAF.]
I think, if anything, they are probably better known than the President of the United States as a result of television and their recent very great exposure for the whole world to see.
It is my very great privilege today to welcome them not only here again to this house and this office, but to announce that Colonel Borman, his wife, and two sons are going to make a goodwill trip to Western Europe. The number of countries to be visited is, at present, eight. The number may be extended.
We think this is a very appropriate trip for him to make for several reasons.
First, a personal note with regard to the inaugural ceremonies to indicate the sense of continuity of the space program. Naturally, when the inauguration invitations went out I suggested that we invite the three astronauts who are with me today to come to the inauguration. The NASA director1very appropriately pointed out that the invitation should be extended to a larger group, because these three men, as Colonel Borman and his colleagues have taken every opportunity to point out, could not have done what they have done without building on what has gone on before them. So, consequently, a group of nine came as guests to the inauguration.
1Thomas O. Paine, Acting Administrator.
As Colonel Borman goes to Europe, he pointed out to me just a few minutes ago that his two colleagues have a mission here at home that they need to undertake and consequently will not be going with him. But Colonel Borman will be representing not only these three, but the men who have gone before.
I should also point out that as he goes to Europe he emphasizes a fact we often forget: that the knowledge which made possible these great discoveries is not limited to this Nation; that it comes from the whole history of scientific discovery, and there is certainly no national monopoly on that kind of knowledge.
It is significant to note that when we look at the national backgrounds of these men here we find represented the Canadians, the British, the Germans, and the Czechoslovakians here in this group.
So I think it is very appropriate for Colonel Borman to go to Western Europe and to bring to them not only the greetings of the people of the United States, but to point out what is the fact: that we in America do not consider that this is a monopoly, these great new discoveries that we are making; that we recognize the great contributions that others have made and will make in the future; and that we do want to work together with all peoples on this earth in the high adventure of exploring the new areas of space.
So, consequently, Colonel, I think they would like to hear from you, as they have heard so often.
I told the Colonel and his colleagues before that they have been appearing so often and so well in various parts of the country that these exposures to the national press corps causes them much less concern than it does me when I come before you.
Note: The President spoke at 11 a.m. in the Fish Room at the White House before a group of reporters.
Colonel Borman's response and announcement of his itinerary are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, PP. 190, 208).