Richard Nixon
January 07, 1970

Telephone Conversation With King Hassan II of Morocco.
THE PRESIDENT Hello, Your Majesty.

KING HASSAN. Hello, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Your Majesty?
KING HASSAN. Yes, how are you, Mr. President?
THE PRESIDENT. Just very well, and it is a very great pleasure to speak to you again. I well remember our meeting when I was in Africa in 1957.
KING HASSAN. On this occasion I would like to express to you a second time my best wishes for your health, your happiness, your success, and for the prosperity and glory for the United States of America.
And I wish to meet you as soon as possible to talk about the problems interesting our countries.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Your Majesty, I look forward to our having a meeting later this year. I well recall our meeting when we met in Rabat in 1957. And I believe that it is vitally important that we have a common policy in that area of the world, one which is mutually to our benefit.
KING HASSAN. I shall be very happy to visit your country and to visit you, Mr. President. I address to you my best wishes.
THE PRESIDENT. We are very proud that the first communications satellite-the first one in Africa--is in Morocco, and that is very appropriate because the relations between the United States and Morocco, from the time of George Washington, have been close and friendly. And we know they will continue to be close and friendly.
KING HASSAN. And this satellite will be a new bridge between our continent and our countries.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. It is very good. Your voice is clear, and your sentiments also are very welcome here. We certainly reciprocate in every respect.
KING HASSAN. Good evening, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT. We will look forward to seeing you later in this year in person. Goodby.

KING HASSAN. Goodby. Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 9:26 a.m. in San Clemente, Calif. His conversation with King Hassan II inaugurated the new communications satellite service which was made possible by the first ground station in Africa, built near Rabat as a joint U.S.-Moroccan venture.