Richard Nixon
July 02, 1971

Executive Order 11605—Amendment of Executive Order No. 10450 of April 27, 1953, Relating to Security Requirements for Government Employment
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes of the United States including 5 U.S.C. Sections 1101 et seq., 3301, 3571, 7301, 7313, 7501(c), 7512, 7532 and 7533; and as President of the United States, and finding such action necessary in the best interests of national security, it is hereby ordered that Executive Order No. 10450 of April 27, 1953, as amended, is hereby further amended as follows:
1. Paragraph (5) of Section 8(a) shall read: "(5) Knowing membership in, or affiliation or sympathetic association with, any foreign or domestic organization, association, movement, group, or combination of persons (hereinafter referred to as organization) which is totalitarian, fascist, communist, subversive, or which has adopted a policy of unlawfully advocating the commission of acts of force or violence to deny others their rights under the Constitution or laws of the United States or of any State, or which seeks to overthrow the government of the United States or any State or subdivision thereof by unlawful means.
2. Section 12 shall read:
"(a) Executive Order No. 9835 of March 21, 1947, as amended is hereby revoked.
"(b) The head of each department and agency shall be furnished by the Attorney General with the name of each organization which shall be or has been heretofore designated under this order. Except as specifically provided hereafter, nothing contained herein shall be construed in any way to affect previous designations made pursuant to Executive Order No. 10450, as amended.
"(c) The Subversive Activities Control Board shall, upon petition of the Attorney General, conduct appropriate hearings to determine whether any organization is totalitarian, fascist, communist, subversive, or whether it has adopted a policy of unlawfully advocating the commission of acts of force or violence to deny others their rights under the Constitution or laws of the United States or of any State, or which seeks to overthrow the government of the United States or any State or subdivision thereof by unlawful means.
"(d) The Board may determine that an organization has adopted a policy of unlawfully advocating the commission of acts of force or violence to deny others their constitutional or statutory rights or that an organization seeks to overthrow the government of the United States or any State or subdivision thereof by unlawful means if it is found that such group engages in, unlawfully advocates, or has among its purposes or objectives, or adopts as a means of obtaining any of its purposes or objectives,—
(1) The commission of acts of force or violence or other unlawful acts to deny others their rights or benefits guaranteed by the Constitution or laws of the United States or of the several States or political subdivisions thereof; or
(2) The unlawful damage or destruction of property; or injury to persons; or
(3) The overthrow or destruction of the government of the United States or the government of any State, Territory, district, or possession thereof, or the government of any political subdivision therein, by unlawful means; or
(4) The commission of acts which violate laws pertaining to treason, rebellion or insurrection, riots or civil disorders, seditious conspiracy, sabotage, trading with the enemy, obstruction of the recruiting and enlistment service of the United States, impeding officers of the United States, or related crimes or offenses.
"(e) The Board may determine an organization to be 'totalitarian' if it is found that such organization engages in activities which seek by unlawful means the establishment of a system of government in the United States which is autocratic and in which control is centered in a single individual, group, or political party, allowing no effective representation to opposing individuals, groups, or parties and providing no practical opportunity for dissent.
"(f) The Board may determine an organization to be 'fascist' if it is found that such organization engages in activities which seek by unlawful means the establishment of a system of government in the United States which is characterized by rigid one-party dictatorship, forcible suppression of the opposition, ownership of the means of production under centralized governmental control and which fosters racism.
"(g) The Board may determine an organization to be 'communist' if it is found that such organization engages in activities which seek by unlawful means the establishment of a government in the United States which is based upon the revolutionary principles of Marxism-Leninism, which interprets history as a relentless class war aimed at the destruction of the existing society and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the government ownership of the means of production and distribution of property, and the establishment of a single authoritarian party.
"(h) The Board may determine an organization to be 'subversive' if it is found that such organization engages in activities which seek the abolition or destruction by unlawful means of the government of the United States or any State, or subdivision thereof.
"(i) The Board may further determine, after consideration of the evidence, that an organization has ceased to exist. Upon petition of the Attorney General or upon petition of any organization which has been designated pursuant to this section the Board after appropriate hearings may determine that such organization does not currently meet the standards for designation. The Attorney General shall appropriately revise or modify the information furnished to departments and agencies consistent with the determinations of the Board.
"(j) The Board shall issue appropriate regulations for the implementation of this section."
RICHARD NIXON
The White House
July 2, 1971
NOTE: Executive Order 11605 was not issued in the form of a White House press release.