Richard Nixon
July 30, 1969

Statement on Arrival at Saigon, Republic of Vietnam.
I AM HAPPY that the moon landing, which in its universality signifies a symbolic drawing together of all mankind, has provided an occasion for me to meet with President Thieu in the capital of his country.
We have reviewed the developments which have taken place since Midway:
--the steady progress in pacification, involving the people in greater political participation and in decisions about their future;
--the elections of village and hamlet officials, and in training for more effective local administration;
--the improving performance of the Vietnamese armed forces, and in their equipment and training, and their determination to take over an increasing share of the burden of the conflict;
--the plans for a revolutionary land reform program;
--and most importantly, the moves we together have made toward peace. Our purpose is peace.
We have repeatedly come forward with proposals which could lead to the beginning of the end of this tragic conflict.
On March 25th President Thieu offered to talk with the NLF [National Liberation Front] without preconditions.
In the six points of his speech of April 6 he proposed a basis on which those opposed to the government would be welcomed as full members of the national community.
On May 14 I proposed eight points which could lead to the withdrawal of all non-South Vietnamese forces, a cease-fire, and elections under international supervision.

On July 11 President Thieu undertook another major step in his six point proposal through which all the people of South Vietnam could exercise their right of self-determination through internationally supervised elections, in which they can genuinely express their choice, free from fear and coercion. An electoral commission in which all political parties would be represented would assure equal opportunities to all candidates.
The GVN [Government of Vietnam] has offered to abide by the results of the elections, whatever they may be.
On July 20, President Thieu made the offer to North Vietnam for direct discussions toward reunification through free and internationally supervised elections.
President Thieu, after his return from Midway said "everything is negotiable."
We have gone as far as we can or should go in opening the door to negotiations which will bring peace. It is now time for the other side to sit down with us and talk seriously about ways to stop the killing, to put an end to this tragic war which has brought so great destruction to friend and foe alike. We have put forward constructive proposals to bring an end to the conflict. We are ready to talk with the other side about their proposals. Let us, with determination and good will, seek to put an end to the destruction and suffering which the people of Vietnam, North and South, have borne so long.
Note: The statement was released at Saigon.