Richard Nixon
July 14, 1970

Remarks on Arrival at Louisville, Kentucky.
I WANT to thank all of you for this wonderfully warm welcome.
I would also like to present to you some who have come here, as we have brought a number of our people from Washington so they could see what America is really like out here in Kentucky.
I have the belief that too often those of us who work in Washington and who live in Washington, we see a part of America but we don't see, of course, all of America. I think it is very important to bring the government to the people. That is one of the reasons we have come to Kentucky.
We have already had a Cabinet meeting in California, we had one in Indianapolis, we have also had one in Chicago, and we are going to have a major meeting of the Appalachian Council along with members of our Cabinet right here in Kentucky. I would like to have you meet some of our people.
The Secretary of Agriculture is here, Secretary Hardin. Now you do right by these Kentucky farmers, you understand? Okay?

The Secretary of Labor, Mr. Hodgson. The head of our new Office of Management and Budget, Mr. Shultz.
The Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity, Mr. Rumsreid.
Then we have some Counsellors to the President.
Counsellor Moynihan. He's tall enough; he doesn't have to stand up here.
Mr. Harlow does have to stand up here. Mr. Harlow, our Counsellor to the President.
Mr. Ehrlichman, the head of the Domestic Council.
I simply want to say this to all of you here. I remember my many visits to this State, all over this State. I am also well aware of the fact of the warm receptions we have received and also, although this, of course, is a nonpolitical visit with you, that every time I have been on the ticket Kentucky has come through for us and I have appreciated that.
At this time I have noted some of your signs. And I know your concerns. I can assure you you have an administration in Washington that is working for all of those great purposes in which you believe. We are working for the kind of peace that we will be able to keep, the kind of peace that all Americans want and we are going to get it, I can assure you.
We are working for a better life for all Americans, a better life in every respect. And I mean by that that what we really need and what you all want is the kind of policy under which we can have high employment and the kind of policy, also, under which we can cut down on that rise in the cost of living, which I know is hurting all of you. We are working for those goals.
But most of all I think I want you to know this: that as we come to what is really a State which is at once an Eastern State--it is in the eastern time zone--it is the first State west of the Appalachians, as you know, to become a State of the Union; it is a Southern State, as we all know, and yet it is the birthplace of both Abraham Lincoln and Jefferson Davis. And I really feel that here in Kentucky we are in the heart of America and we are mighty happy to be here.
Finally, I want to thank all of you for coming out to this airport. I saw the cars parked for miles along. I know it is a little bit warm out there. I know that some of you have been standing here for a long time. I just wish we could meet all of you, but we have the meetings scheduled downtown.
I just want to thank you all and I hope to be back, because after a welcome like this, you always like to come back to Kentucky, I can assure you.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 12:10 p.m. at Standiford Airport.