Richard Nixon
July 31, 1971

Television Interview With ABC Sports Commentator Frank Gifford in Canton, Ohio.
MR. GIFFORD. Mr. President, I know of your fondness not only for sports, physical fitness, but also Vince Lombardi who is being honored here at the Hall of Fame. He was a very special man, I think, to so many people, and I think you felt that.
THE PRESIDENT. He was very special to me mainly because I read about him and admired him as millions of Americans did who saw what a man he was. He was a great coach, as you, of course, know, but more than that he was a fine family man. He was a man who loved his country, and he set a magnificent example for people all over the country.
I think that if you were to pick one man who has more caught the imagination of the Nation in the field of sports it is probably Vince Lombardi because of his character.

MR. GIFFORD. He certainly had that. Of course, the other inductees that are being inducted in the Hall of Fame, Y. A. Tittle, Jim Brown, Bruiser Kinard, Andy Robustelli, Hewitt--
THE PRESIDENT. I remember so well, the time that I met both Y. A. Tittle and Andy Robustelli was in your apartment, Frank, in New York, in 1962. You know, in those years you had those great Giant teams--I don't mean they aren't so great now.
MR. GIFFORD. It was close to a championship team.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, they were championship in my book. And I recall the great time we had, and what fun it was just to sit there and talk football. I have often thought that if I had my life to live over again and did not go into politics I would like to have your job-you know, be a sportscaster or writer.

MR. GIFFORD. We do have a good seat.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Well, possibly if I am not too old you will give me the chance later.
MR. GIFFORD. I have heard you do a very fine color job once before.
Where did the interest in football, physical fitness, athletics in general--I know you are a general sports fan but where did it begin, back at Whittier maybe with Chief Newman, the head coach?
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Whittier, as you know, right next to Southern Cal, is a small college, but with a very fine football tradition. And my coach, Chief Newman, of course, was an alumnus of your college, or university, University of Southern California. As a matter of fact, he was an All-American.
MR. GIFFORD. He was a great player.
THE PRESIDENT. A great player. He played tackle and fullback both, in the days when they went both ways. He played tackle on defense and fullback on offense. But the Chief in a very interesting way was a lot like Lombardi. He was a fellow who produced good teams. I think the thing that I remember most about him was his attitude about being a good loser. He said you ought to be a good loser. But being a good loser to him--he said you have got to hate to lose. You have got to hate to lose and get up off that floor and come back to fight again.
He got that into everyone who ever played for him or, as I did, sat on the bench and was on the taxi squad. And I think perhaps that may have had an effect on me. I had to lose a little before I won.
MR. GIFFORD. Mr. President, it is very difficult now. I know you were a fan of the Los Angeles Rams, a very good fan of the Giants when you were in New York, a fan of the Washington Redskins. Do you find it difficult now to pick a team to root for or do you just like it all?
THE PRESIDENT. Well first, Frank, as President I have to be very nonpartisan, and when I go to a game, consequently, it is very difficult because I like to be for a team, for a man or for a team. I don't mean being so much against the other team, but for somebody I know.
But what I have now decided is the best rule is to be for the team in the city I happen to be living. Now that is the Washington Redskins at the present time, with George Allen, who incidentally, as you remember, coached at Whittier before he went on to the Chicago Bears as a defensive coach, and then on to the Rams, and now to the Washington Redskins. I have told him I am going to come out and root for the Redskins. But let me say, that when I am in Los Angeles, I am roofing for the Rams or when I am in San Diego, I am with the Chargers. You name it, and I will be there.
MR. GIFFORD. Mr. President, I want to thank you for joining us. I know I speak for Mrs. Lombardi, Marie, all the inductees. I know how terribly honored they are to have you here.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think it is nice that she is going to be here tonight, and I think also, Frank, speaking of the fact that Vince Lombardi was such a wonderful family man, a deeply religious man, that this [July 30] is his 31st wedding anniversary. It would have been tonight. So, the fact that he is in the Hall of Fame, that she is here on this day which must have meant so much to both of them, I think, is very significant.
MR. GIFFORD. It could not have been better put.
THE PRESIDENT. Thank you.

MR. GIFFORD. Thank you.
Note: The interview was videotaped on Friday, July 30, 1971, for broadcast on ABC during the Professional Football Hall of Fame game between the Los Angeles Rams and the Houston Oilers in Canton, Ohio, on Saturday, July 31.