Richard Nixon
July 24, 1969

Remarks to Apollo 11 Astronauts Aboard the U.S.S. Hornet Following Completion of Their Lunar Mission.
Neil, Buzz, and Mike:
I want you to know that I think I am the luckiest man in the world, and I say this not only because I have the honor to be President of the United States, but particularly because I have the privilege of speaking for so many in welcoming you back to earth.[See APP Note.]
I can tell you about all the messages we have received in Washington. Over 100 foreign governments, emperors, presidents, prime ministers, and kings, have sent the most warm messages that we have ever received. They represent over 2 billion people on this earth, all of them who have had the opportunity, through television, to see what you have done.
Then I also bring you messages from members of the Cabinet and Members of the Senate, Members of the House, the space agency, from the streets of San Francisco where people stopped me a few days ago, and you all love that city, I know, as I do.
But most important, I had a telephone call yesterday. The toll wasn't, incidentally, as great as the one I made to you fellows on the moon. I made that collect, incidentally, in case you didn't know. But I called three, in my view, three of the greatest ladies and most courageous ladies in the whole world today--your wives.
From Jan, Joan, and Pat, I bring their love and their congratulations. We think it is just wonderful that they have participated at least in television in this return. We are only sorry they couldn't be here.
Also, I will let you in on a little secret. I made a date with them. I invited them to dinner on the 13th of August, right after you come out of quarantine. It will be a state dinner held in Los Angeles. The Governors of all the 50 States will be there, the Ambassadors, others from around the world and in America. They told me that you would come, too. All I want to know is: Will you come? We want to honor you then.
MR. NEIL A. ARMSTRONG. We will do anything you say, Mr. President, anytime.
THE PRESIDENT. One question, I think all of us would like to ask: As we saw you bouncing around in that float out there, I wonder if that wasn't the hardest part of the journey. Did any of you get seasick?
MR. ARMSTRONG. No, we didn't, and it was one of the hardest parts, but it was one of the most pleasant, we can assure you.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I just know that you can sense what we all sense. When you get back now incidentally, have you been able to follow some of the things that happened since you have been gone? Did you know about the All-Star Game?
COL. EDWIN E. ALDRIN, JR. Yes, sir. The capsule communicators have been giving us daily reports.
THE PRESIDENT. Were you American League or National League?
Col. ALDRIN. National League.
MR. ARMSTRONG. Neither one.
THE PRESIDENT. There is the politician in the group.
MR. ARMSTRONG. We are sorry you missed that.
THE PRESIDENT. You knew that, too?
MR. ARMSTRONG. We heard about the rain. We haven't learned to control the weather yet, but that is something we can look forward to.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I can only summarize it because I don't want to hold you now. You have so much more to do. You look great. Do you feel as great as you look?
MR. ARMSTRONG. We feel great.
THE PRESIDENT. Frank Borman feels you are a little younger by reason of having gone into space. Is that right? Do you feel a little bit younger?
MR. ARMSTRONG. We are younger than Frank Borman.
THE PRESIDENT. He is over there. Come on over, Frank, so they can see you. Are you going to take that lying down?
ASTRONAUTS. It looks like he has aged in the last couple weeks.
COL. FRANK BORMAN. They look a little heavy.
Mr. President, the one thing I wanted--you know, we have a poet in Mike Collins. He really gave me a hard time for describing the words "fantastic" and "beautiful." I counted them. In 4 minutes up there, you used four "fantastics" and three "beautiful."
THE PRESIDENT. Well, just let me close off with this one thing: I was thinking, as you know, as you came down, and we knew it was a success, and it had only been 8 days, just a week, a long week, that this is the greatest week in the history of the world since the Creation, because as a result of what happened in this week, the world is bigger, infinitely, and also, as I am going to find on this trip around the world, and as Secretary Rogers will find as he covers the other countries in Asia, as a result of what you have done, the world has never been closer together before.
We just thank you for that. I only hope that all of us in Government, all of us in America, that as a result of what you have done, can do our job a little better.
We can reach for the stars just as you have reached so far for the stars.
We don't want to hold you any longer. Anybody have a last--how about promotions? Do you think we can arrange something?
MR. ARMSTRONG. We are just pleased to be back and very honored that you were so kind as to come out here and welcome us back. We look forward to getting out of this quarantine and talking without having the glass between us.
THE PRESIDENT. Incidentally, the speeches that you have to make at this dinner can be very short. If you want to say "fantastic" or "beautiful," that is all right with us. Don't try to think of new adjectives. They have all been said.
Now, I think incidentally that all of us, the millions who are seeing us on television now, seeing you, would feel as I do, that, in a sense, our prayers have been answered, and I think it would be very appropriate if Chaplain Piirto, the Chaplain of this ship, were to offer a prayer of thanksgiving. If he would step up now.
Note: The President spoke at 8:55 a.m. aboard the U.S.S. Hornet near the splashdown site in the Pacific. The prayer offered by Lt. Comdr. John A. Piirto, USN, Chaplain of the Hornet follows: Let us pray.
Lord God, our Heavenly Father, our minds are staggered and our spirits exultant with the magnitude and precision of this entire Apollo 11 mission. We have spent the past week in communal anxiety and hope as our astronauts sped through the glories and dangers of the heavens.
As we tried to understand and analyze the scope of this achievement for human life, our reason is overwhelmed with the bounding gratitude and joy, even as we realize the increasing challenges of the future. This magnificent event illustrates anew what man can accomplish when purpose is firm and intent corporate.
A man on the moon was promised in this decade, and though some were unconvinced, the reality is with us this morning in the persons of the astronauts: Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. We applaud their splendid exploits, and we pour out our thanksgiving for their safe return to us, to their families, to all mankind.
From our inmost being, we sing humble yet exuberant praise. May the great effort and commitment seen in this Project Apollo inspire our lives to move similarly in other areas of need. May we, the people, by our enthusiasm and emotion and insight move to new landings in brotherhood, human concern, and mutual respect. May our country, afire with inventive leadership and backed by a committed followership, blaze new trails into all areas of human care.
Speed our enthusiasm and bless our joy with dedicated purpose for the many needs at hand. Link us in friendship with peoples throughout the world as we strive together to better human conditions. Grant us peace beginning in our own hearts and a mind attuned with good will toward our neighbors.
All this we pray as our thanksgiving rings out to Thee in the name of our Lord, Amen.
APP Note:  The transcript above is identical to the published version that appears in the Public Papers of the President.  However, other sources suggest there should be numerous corrections to this transcript.  We provide a complete alternative version here in its entirety:
Transcript available atApollo In Real Timewebsite.
PRESIDENT NIXON:  Nell, Buzz, and Mike. I want you to know that I think I'm luckiest man in the world. And I say this not only because I have the honor to be President of the United States, but particularly because I have the privilege of speaking for so many in welcoming you back to Earth.
I could tell you about all the messages we received in Washington. Over one hundred foreign governments, Emperors, and Presidents and Prime Ministers and Kings have sent the most warm messages that we have ever received. They represent over 2 billion people on this Earth. All of them who have had the opportunity through television to see what you have done.
And then I also bring you messages from members of the Cabinet and members of the Senate and members of the House and the Space Agency. From the streets of San Francisco where people stopped me a few days ago, and you all love that city, I know, as I do.
But most important, I had a telephone call yesterday. The toll wasn't, incidentally, as great as the one I made to you fellows on the Moon. (Laughter) I made that collect, incidentally, in case you didn't know. But I called the three of, in my view, three of the greatest ladies and most courageous ladies in the whole world today, your wives.
And from Jan and Joan and Pat, I bring their love and their congratulations. We think that it is just wonderful that they could have participated, at least through television, in this return; we're only sorry they couldn't be here.
And also, I've got to let you in on a little secret - I made a date with them. (Laughter) I invited them to dinner on the 13th of August, right after you come out of quarantine. It will be a state dinner held in Los Angeles. The governors of all the fifty States will be there, the ambassadors, others from around the world and in America. And they told me that you would come too. And all I want to know - will you come? We want to honor you then.
NEIL A. ARMSTRONG: We'll do anything you say, Mr. President. Any time.
THE PRESIDENT:  One question, I think, all of us would like to ask. As we saw you bouncing around in that boat out there, I wonder if that wasn't the hardest part of the journey. Was that - did any of you get seasick?
MR. ARMSTRONG: No, we didn't. And it was one of the harder parts, but it was one of the most pleasant, we can assure you.
THE PRESIDENT:  Yes, well, I just know that you can sense what we all sense. When you get back now - incidentally, have you been able to follow some of the things that happened when you've gone. Did you know about the All-Star game?
MR. ARMSTRONG: Yes, sir. The Capsule Communicators have been giving us daily news reports.
THE PRESIDENT:  They keep you posted. Were you American League or National League?
MR. ARMSTRONG: I'm [a?] National League man.
EDWIN E. (BUZZ) ALDRIN:  I'm non-partisan, sir.
THE PRESIDENT:  That's right.  There's the politician in the group, right.
MR. ARMSTRONG: We're sorry you missed that game.
THE PRESIDENT:  Yes, well - oh, you knew that too.
MR. ARMSTRONG: We hear that...
THE PRESIDENT:  The rain...
MR. ARMSTRONG: The rain. Well, we haven't learned to control the weather yet, but that's something we can look forward to as tomorrow's challenge.
THE PRESIDENT:  Right, right. Well, I can only summarize it because I don't want to hold you now. You have so much more to do. And gee, you look great - do you feel as good as you look?
MR. ARMSTRONG: Oh, we feel just perfect, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT:  Yeah, I understand your - Frank Borman says you're a little younger by reason of having gone into space, is that right. Do you feel that way, a little younger?
MICHAEL COLLINS:  We're a lot younger than Frank Borman. (Laughter).
THE PRESIDENT:  There he is, over there. Come on over Frank, so they can see you. You going to take that lying down?
COLLINS:  It looks like he has aged in the last couple of days.
THE PRESIDENT:  Come on, Frank.
FRANK BORMAN:   Mr. President, the one thing I wanted. You know we have a poet in Mike Collins and he really gave me a hard time for describing in words of 'fantastic' and 'beautiful'. And you - and counted them, in three minutes up there you used four fantastics and two beautifuls. (Laughter).
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, just let me close off with this one thing. I - I was thinking as you know, as you came down and we knew it was a success, and it had only been eight days, just a week, a long week. But this is the greatest week in the history of the world since the creation. Because as a result of what happened in this week, the world is bigger, infinitely. And also, as I'm going to find on this trip around the world, and as Secretary Rogers will find as he covers the other the countries and Asia, as a result of what you've done the world's never been closer together before. And we just thank you for that. And I only hope that all of us in government, all of us in America, that as a result of what you've done, we can do our job a little better. We can reach for the stars, just as you have reached so far for the stars. We don't want to hold you any longer. Anybody have a last re... How about promotions, do you think we could arrange something? (Laughter)
ARMSTRONG:  We're just pleased to be back and very honored that you were so kind as to come out here and welcome us back, and we look forward to getting out of this quarantine...
COLLINS:  Great.
ARMSTRONG:  ...and talking without having glass between us.
THE PRESIDENT:  And incidentally, the speeches that you have to make at this dinner can be very short. And if you want to say fantastic or beautiful, that's all right with us. Don't try to think of any new adjectives; they've all been said. And now, I think incidentally, that all of us who - the millions that are seeing us on television now, are seeing you, would feel as I do that in a sense our prayers have been answered, and I think it would be very appropriate if Chaplain Piirto, the Chaplain of this ship were to offer a prayer of thanksgiving. If he would step up now. Chaplain, thank you.
CHAPLAIN JOHN PIIRTO:  Let us pray. Lord, God, our Heavenly Father. Our minds are staggered and our spirit exalted with the magnitude and precision of this entire Apollo 11 mission. We have spent the past week in communal anxiety and hope as our astronauts sped through the glories and dangers of the heavens. As we try to understand and analyze the scope of this achievement for human life, our reason is overwhelmed with abounding gratitude and joy, even as we realize the increasing challenges of the future. This magnificent event illustrates anew what man can accomplish when purpose is firm and intent corporate. A man on the Moon was promised in this decade. And, though some were unconvinced, the reality is with us this morning, in the persons of astronauts Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. We applaud their splendid exploits and we pour out our thanksgiving for their safe return to us, to their families, to all mankind. From our inmost beings, we sing humble, yet exuberant praise. May the great effort and commitment seen in this project Apollo, inspire our lives to move similarly in other areas of need. May we the people by our enthusiasm and devotion and insight move to new landings in brotherhood, human concern, and mutual respect. May our country, afire with inventive leadership and backed by a committed followership, blaze new trails into all areas of human cares. See our enthusiasm and bless our joy with dedicated purpose for the many needs at hand. Link us in friendship with peoples throughout the world as we strive together to better the human condition. Grant us peace, beginning in our own hearts, and a mind attuned with good will towards our neighbor. All this we pray as our thanksgiving rings out to Thee. In the name of our Lord, amen.
COLLINS:  Amen.
(Music: Star Spangled Banner)
SPEAKER  The astronauts stood to attention. Now Ruffles and Flourishes and again Hail to the Chief.
(Music: Four Ruffles and Flourishes and Hail to the Chief)