Richard Nixon
July 01, 1971

Proclamation 4063—National Star Route Mail Carriers Week

In 1845 Congress provided that future mail transportation contracts were to be awarded by the Postmaster General "to the lowest bidder, tendering sufficient guarantees for faithful performance, without other reference to the mode of such transportation than may be necessary to provide for the due celerity, certainty, and security of such transportation."
That statute not only opened a colorful chapter in American postal service, but also set forth a bold new standard for transportation of the mails: "Celerity, Certainty, and Security." Bids from private contractors under the 1845 law were soon marked on the books of the Post Office Department with three stars, signifying the three points of that motto. Over time, the bids themselves became known as "star bids", and eventually the contract service for transporting the mail by all modes, except boats and railways, came to be known as "star route mail service."
Since the inception of this service 126 years ago, star route carriers have performed an important task for the American people, transporting the mail over thousands of miles of roads where regular postal service was unavailable. In recent years, the star route carriers have also made an important contribution to rural America, often supplementing the efforts of the regular carriers.
In recognition of the dedicated public service of our star route carriers, the Congress, by House Joint Resolution 583, has requested the President to issue a proclamation designating the last full week in July of 1971 as National Star Route Mail Carriers Week.
Now, Therefore, I, Richard Nixon, President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the week beginning July 25, 1971, as National Star Route Mail Carriers Week.
I urge the Postal Service, and all interested groups and organizations, to observe that week with appropriate recognition to the Nation's star route mail carriers.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this first day of July, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred seventy-one, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred ninety-fifth.


RICHARD NIXON