Richard Nixon
July 15, 1971

Memorandums About the Combined Federal Campaign.
Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
I am pleased to announce that Honorable Rogers C. B. Morton, Secretary of the Interior, has agreed to serve as Chairman of the Combined Federal Campaign for the National Capital Area this fall.
As in the past, this year's campaign will combine into a single drive the solicitation efforts of the United Fund, the American Red Cross, the National Health Agencies, and the International Service Agencies. In this one drive we will be seeking to do our share to meet the needs of more than 150 local, national, and international agencies in the diversified fields of health, welfare, and social service. These voluntary charitable organizations perform services that are vital to our community, our nation and our world.
Through the Combined Federal Campaign, Federal personnel are offered a unique opportunity to help hundreds of voluntary organizations by one gift once a year, a pledge made particularly easy by the availability of payroll deductions. I know that Secretary Morton will have your wholehearted support in this endeavor, and I hope you will commend the campaign with its payroll deduction feature to Federal employees and military personnel in your organization.
I request that you serve personally as Chairman of the combined campaign in your organization and appoint one of your leading assistants as your Vice Chairman. Secretary Morton should be advised of the person you designate as your Vice Chairman.
You have my every best wish for another successful campaign.
RICHARD NIXON
Memorandum for All Federal Employees and Military Personnel:
The 1971 Combined Federal Campaign gives each of us the opportunity to show our individual concern for those in need of help. In this one campaign are combined the annual fund-raising efforts of the local United Fund, the American Red Cross, the National Health Agencies, and the International Service Agencies.
Through CFC federal employees and military personnel provide support to voluntary agencies which are working to make our community and nation a better place in which to live. We help those voluntary agencies which are working to lessen the pain and distress of illness and are supporting research to seek cures from dreaded diseases. We assist those agencies which serve beyond our own national boundaries, extending a helping hand to our friends in overseas lands. Thus the voluntary agencies supported by CFC are doing those things which in a free society they can best do to enhance the quality of life.
This year, for the first time, the Combined Federal Campaign will be the uniform fund-raising method for the entire Federal service, thereby enlarging the number of Federal employees and military personnel who will have the opportunity to participate in this convenient form of charitable giving.
I commend to you the 1971 Combined Federal Campaign. It is a worthy cause. Generosity and concern for others has always been a tradition of all who serve in the United States Government. From my proud association with you over the past several years, I feel confident you will continue this tradition and that you will welcome the opportunity to be of service through your voluntary contributions.
I send you every best wish during this year's Combined Federal Campaign.
RICHARD NIXON
Note: The memorandums were released at San Clemente, Calif.