Richard Nixon
June 08, 1971

Remarks to Members Attending the 1971 Symposium of the American Committee on Italian Migration.
THANK you very much, Father Cogo.1
I wish, first, to say to this very distinguished group that I only hope the warmth of my remarks will equal the warmth of the weather here in the Rose Garden. Congressman Rodino said, "Don't worry about these people, they are all from southern Italy, they won't mind."
1The Reverend Joseph A. Cogo, Executive Secretary, American Committee on Italian Migration.
I, too, want you to know that the sentiments that were expressed in the State of the Union Address, I think, are very appropriate when referring to your group. President Eisenhower met with you first, and since that time you have met with President Kennedy, and now I have that high privilege and that great honor.
Let me speak to you about why it is so important for us to be the land of the open door, why, not simply from the standpoint of wanting our country to provide a haven for people who are distressed, people who need assistance from other lands, but why America needs those people, why they add to America.
One of the great problems that any society has as it becomes older, as it becomes richer, is that it tends to become more complacent; it tends to lose its drive, its dynamism, its imagination, frankly--its character. That is the history of civilizations over the past.
And one mark of the American civilization has been that we have never fallen into that fault due to the fact that we have always had the infusion of new people, new people who come here with great idealism, with great determination. In a sense, as somebody would put it, they are people that are still trying to make it, that aren't thinking in terms of having it made. And what they contribute are not simply the skills to which Father Cogo has referred--they are there, of course--but even more, they contribute character and strength and drive, and that is what this country needs and that is what particularly our friends of Italian background have contributed so greatly to America.
I know, incidentally, that here in our own Cabinet we have John Volpe, and what a wonderful spokesman he is for all of you. And I have on my White House Staff John Scali,2and just to show that we look upon this not as a partisan matter, I am always, of course, glad to have our good friend from New Jersey, Pete Rodino, here.
2John A. Scali, Special Consultant to the President.
But what I really feel that you should know is this: I know that this organization was set up because of your concern that the laws of this land would become too restrictive and that people of Italian background and of other backgrounds, as well, would not be allowed to come here. Let me say that will not be the case.
It will not be the case because America needs the new people. It needs the new ideas. It needs the new drive, the new enthusiasm, the character that our people from abroad who are still coming here by the thousands can give to us. I hope America will always be the land of the open door, because as long as that door is open, it means that this land will continue to grow and continue to prosper and continue to have that drive which makes a great nation.
I simply want to close by saying that I only wish we could provide an air-conditioned garden for you. I understand you are going to have an air-conditioned tour, however, and we want you all to be welcome.
I think this is the last event we are having in this garden before we have a wedding ceremony on Saturday, and so we are very happy to have such a distinguished group here. I am standing, I think, where the minister usually stands.
But I have preached to you long enough. Let me say, have a wonderful time while you are here, and when you talk to me--believe me when you talk to me about the need to keep the doors of this Nation open for those from abroad who can contribute to it, it is like the preacher talking to the choir. I am with you.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 12:03 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House.