Richard Nixon
June 02, 1971

Remarks on Presenting the Presidential Medal of Freedom to William J. Hopkins.
Ladies and gentlemen:
This is a very special ceremony which can come only once in 40 years. I think the way to introduce this ceremony is to tell what I think is one of the most musing stories in the long history of the White House.
One day Calvin Coolidge was walking with a friend through Lafayette Park and the friend pointed to the White House and jokingly said, "Who lives there?"
President Coolidge responded, "No one lives there. They just come and go."
The one man who in 40 years, has always been in the White House, who has not just come and gone, is Bill Hopkins. He has served seven Presidents, four Democrats, three Republicans, with devotion. In that period of time, he has become, I would say, the indispensable man in the White House.
I do not know how we can replace him, but the time has come when we must find another one who can become that indispensable man.
Also, it should be pointed out that he proves that coming into Government service at the very first level does not mean that you cannot go to the top. He came in as a GS-1, 40 years ago, and he leaves as GS-17, with the highest rank that we can give in the executive staff of the White House.
Now, the problem that I have is: What kind of recognition can we give him? I looked over the record. He has been honored by several Presidents. He was honored by President Eisenhower. Five years ago this month a special recognition was given to him by President Johnson. He has received the highest award as far as the Civil Service is concerned, the Federal Civil Service Award.
So virtually every goodie that a President has to give, Bill, to somebody like you has already been given out, except one. Now we have for him a surprise, and I think all of you will join me in saying that it is well that we give him the highest recognition that can be given to anyone who is a civilian by the Nation and the President, speaking in behalf of the Nation.
I at this time am going to present to Bill Hopkins the Medal of Freedom. The citation has been eloquently written, and I think I should read it for you, because it is one that sums up everything that all of us want to say to Bill Hopkins on this special day:
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AWARDS THIS PRESIDENTIAL MEDAL OF FREEDOM TO WILLIAM J. HOPKINS
During his forty years in the White House, under seven Presidents, William J. Hopkins has written a record of skilled and devoted service unique in the annals of the Presidency. Not only has he borne heavy responsibilities with great efficiency and uncommon good sense, but each new President in turn has learned to rely on him as a fount of wisdom, a reservoir of experience and a rock of loyalty.
Guiding each new administration through its initial steps, standing as a staunch friend to all, he has been, in the best sense, a selfless partisan of the Presidency, and of the Nation that these seven Presidents have been able to serve better because of the help that he gave.
And true to his long tradition of anonymous service but selfless service, Bill Hopkins has requested that he not break the silence of talking publicly today, but we are going to give you the opportunity to at least hear from him and from Mrs. Hopkins, because we have set up at the back of the lawn there some refreshments. We would like for all of you to join the Hopkins family there. Come up and congratulate him. And maybe he will tell you how he did it, because some place in this crowd is somebody who, maybe 40 years from now, is going to get a Medal of Freedom just as he has, if you can do as well as he did over 40 years.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 12:12 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House at a reception honoring Mr. Hopkins, who had retired as Executive Assistant to the President on May 28, 1971.
On June 2, the White House released biographical data on Mr. Hopkins and a fact sheet on the Presidential Medal of Freedom.