Richard Nixon
June 11, 1970

Special Message to the Congress Urging Legislation To Avoid Further Pollution in the Santa Barbara Channel
To the Congress of the United States:
In 1955 the State of California took steps to protect a particularly beautiful area of its coastline by creating a State Sanctuary extending sixteen miles along the Santa Barbara Channel and closing it to all petroleum exploration. About a decade later, however, the Federal Government issued leases for petroleum exploration immediately seaward from the State Sanctuary. Oil platforms were soon constructed and petroleum drilling began. In January 1969, a blowout in the Channel resulted in widespread oil pollution of the Sanctuary.
The twenty Federal leases seaward from the Sanctuary which were granted by the previous Administration should be cancelled. Legislation being submitted today would terminate these leases and create a Marine Sanctuary. Compensation to the lessees would be funded by revenue from oil production at the Elk Hills Naval Petroleum Reserve which is also located in California.
To avoid further marine pollution, however, it will be necessary to continue pumping oil from three leases in the area. The oil beneath the Channel where the 1969 blowout occurred is contained in a geological formation which was damaged by oil drilling. If not bled off this high pressure oil would escape through zones of structural weakness causing further pollution. The legislation I am proposing would, therefore, allow production on these three leases under strict management controls.
This proposal for Santa Barbara illustrates our strong commitment to use offshore lands in a balanced and responsible manner. It recognizes the earlier decision made by the people of California to set aside a part of their coastline as a sanctuary, and it extends the protected area across the Channel to Santa Cruz Island.
This recommendation is based on the belief that immediate economic gains are not the only, or even the major, way of measuring the value of a geographic area. The ability of that area to sustain wildlife and its capacity to delight and inspire those who visit it for recreation can be far more important characteristics. This proposal recognizes that technology alone cannot bring national greatness, and that we must never pursue prosperity in a way that mortgages the nation's posterity.
I urge the Congress to give this legislation early and careful consideration. It represents another way in which the Federal Government can clearly demonstrate its commitment to the quality of life in America.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

June 11, 1970
Note: On the same day, the White House released the transcript of a news briefing on the President's message by Senator George Murphy and Representative Charles M. Teague, both of California, and Dr. William T. Pecora, Director, Geological Survey, Department of the Interior.