Richard Nixon
June 23, 1970

Remarks on Receiving Report of the Public Land Law Review Commission.
Chairman Aspinall, members of the Commission, and guests:
I am very happy to receive this report and also it is a privilege to express appreciation to the members of the Commission for the work that you have contributed.
I know that as far as that $7 million budget is concerned, that some of it, of course, necessarily went to staff, but as far as the members of the Commission were concerned, those appointed by the President, those appointed by the President of the Senate and by the Speaker of the House, and also the Chairman who was selected by the 18 other members of the Commission, that this was a labor that was added to the duties you otherwise had. And our grateful appreciation goes to all of you for the work that you have done.
I think this will be noted, after 5 years, as being one of the most extensive, perhaps the most extensive study of this subject in the history of the Republic. I believe that as we enter the 1970's it will have, without question, a very great effect on the policy of this country.
I note, for example, on the flyleaf, adding to what you said about the 755 million acres, it says "one-third of the nation's lands." We think of one-third of America which is public land. We think of what that public land will be, what it will contribute to the future generations who will be living in America in the years ahead. And it is essential to plan now for the use of that land, not to do it on simply a case-by-case basis but to have an overall policy, a strategy rather than simply the tactics dealing with case-by-case matters when they come up.
I think this will provide for this administration and for all of us who have worked with you, for the Governors and for others, it will provide for us a great deal of very helpful information and, also, recommendations, many of which, of course, will be accepted and we trust implemented.
I would like to mention all the members of the Commission who are here, in addition to the distinguished Chairman who has given his entire public life, at least his life in Congress, to this particular field. But I do understand that among those who are here as guests is one former Member of the Senate who retired undefeated in 1934 after 4 years in the House and 12 years in the Senate. He was the author of the bill creating the Federal Communications Commission. He was also the author of the bill which provided for the Grand Coulee Dam. And I think Mr. Clarence Dill is here. Would you come over so they can all see you?
[At this point the President introduced former Senator Clarence C. Dill of Washington, then resumed speaking.]
I would also like to say to the ladies and gentlemen here---many of you, of course, have already seen the White House--this is part of your public land. But it is a special bit of public land that belongs to all of us. We happen to be the present occupants of the house--a very nice house, as a matter of fact. We would like for you to share with us, however, the house to the extent that you have the time to do so.
For the Senators and Congressmen and many others it will not be a new experience, but for many of you even who have been here before, to walk through those rooms, not in a huge tour and not even at one of the great dinners when so many other people are there, to get the sense of history of where this country has come-from the time that it was 3 million people and 13 States along the Atlantic seaboard and has now become a great continental world power--to think also of the history that you feel in those rooms and the history that you have made and contributed to through this study.
I might say in conclusion that when we think of public lands, perhaps one of the greatest programs, in terms of influencing the future of America and, particularly, the development of the West, was the homestead law which had to do with the use of public lands.
And I trust that history will record one day that this program--about one-third of the Nation's remaining land will have the same vision and make the same contribution to the greater America that we all want for our children.
Incidentally, Mr. Chairman, I know that in this report you recommend selling some of our public lands. You are not going to sell the White House, are you?
CONGRESSMAN ASPINALL.. No, we will not sell the White House, not without a Presidential mandate.
THE PRESIDENT. Thank you.
Note: The President spoke shortly after noon in the Rose Garden at the White House following the presentation of the report by the Commission's Chairman, Representative Wayne N. Aspinall of Colorado, whose remarks are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 6, p. 807). The report is entitled "One-Third of the Nation's Land--A Report to the President and to the Congress by the Public Land Law Review Commission" (Government Printing Office, 342 pp.).