Richard Nixon
June 12, 1969

Remarks at the Graduation Ceremony of the Capitol Page School.
Ladies and gentlemen:
I understand that not only those among the graduating class, but many of their parents are here.
This is a very special occasion for this White House Rose Garden. The roses come later in the season, fellows, if you miss them.
I remember the first time I handed out diplomas for the Capitol Page School was in 1953, about the year that some of the members of this class probably were born.
And through the years, going back clear to 1947, I recall those occasions when pages have rendered superb service, first in the House and then in the Senate.
I particularly appreciate the opportunity to participate in this ceremony today because, of all the graduating classes across this country from the secondary schools of America, I would say that the percentage chance that one of the members or more, or any member of this class, could become a Member of the House or Senate or even higher is higher among the Capitol pages than any other group.
As you know, it has been traditional for many years that people who serve as Capitol pages, while they may get very tired of it, it gets into their blood; and they enter political life at a later time. Some of them run for office. All of them participate in politics in their own communities.
I simply want to say in this brief address to you, because I know you have been submitted to a great deal of speaking in these last 3 days of these ceremonies, that we appreciate the work that you have rendered during your service in the House.
I know that all of you will now go on to higher education and, also, I hope that many of you will have gotten just enough taste of politics and political life to continue in that field in the years ahead.
We wish you the very best. We congratulate you. We congratulate your parents for having the foresight to have you become Capitol pages.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 5:28 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. Following his remarks he presented diplomas to graduating members of the Capitol Page School.