Richard Nixon
March 25, 1971

Remarks by Telephone to Workers on the Supersonic Transport Program.
I KNOW this is a deeply disheartening moment for all those of you who have worked so hard and so long to make the American SST a reality. And I am sure that your disappointment is compounded not only of uncertainty about what it means for your own personal future, but also of distress that a project in which you believed has been turned down by the Congress.
I share your disappointment, and I simply want to take this opportunity to express to you personally my thanks for all that you have done over the years to bring this project so close to completion-and also my determination that the remarkable combination of skills and talents your team represents should not be lost to the Nation.
Each time I fly in Air Force One---a Boeing plane--I am reminded of the role Boeing has played in making America the world's leader in commercial aviation. Throughout the world, the 707, the 727, the 737, and now the giant 747 have become symbols of America's leadership. I am counting on you here at Boeing to remain a dynamic force in our determined effort, even in the face of this defeat for the SST, to maintain that leadership.
The reason I fought so hard to keep the SST project alive was that I believe deeply that America must remain in the vanguard of scientific and technological progress--the kind of progress your team represents, and to which you have been dedicated. Congress action on the SST has come as a severe blow to us all. But I am determined that America must and will continue pushing outward the horizons of the unknown. I am also determined that we must and will make full use of the most valuable resource we have as a nation--the skill, the dedication, and the imagination of its people, such as you on the SST team, who have made our advances possible in the past and on whom we depend to go forward in the future.
Note: The President spoke at 4:50 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House to employees of the Boeing Aircraft Company in Seattle, Wash., and Wichita, Kans.