Richard Nixon
March 03, 1971

Memorandum About the Combined Federal Campaign
Memorandum to Heads of Departments and Agencies
You are aware of my deep personal interest in strengthening and encouraging voluntary action in the United States. The concept of people voluntarily working together to better the lives of their neighbors and to improve the quality of life in their communities and the nation is deeply rooted in our American tradition. One of our great needs now is to enlist the energies of American citizens committed to voluntary action.
This administration has made progress in developing a better understanding and awareness of the unique capabilities of the voluntary movement in the United States and of the benefits it can provide to all of our people, and we have begun the process of strengthening organizations which carry out voluntary actions.
As one step in this process, the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, Robert E. Hampton, has recently initiated several changes in the Combined Federal Campaign which should strengthen the support of voluntary charitable organizations by Federal employees and military personnel. For the first time, the Combined Federal Campaign will become the uniform fund-raising method for the Federal service. Every Federal employee in the United States, regardless of location, will now have the opportunity to participate in a Combined Federal Campaign. In addition, a new Loaned Executive program will permit, in appropriate circumstances, the temporary assignment of Federal employees to work directly with the voluntary organizations in conducting the combined campaign within the Federal service.
During the past six years, the Combined Federal Campaign has demonstrated a significant potential for bolstering voluntary organizations in this country, including the local United Funds, the American National Red Cross, the National Health Agencies, and the International Service Agencies. The changes announced today should rekindle that spirit of voluntarism and bring the Federal Government closer to these organizations and to the local communities which the government serves.
Voluntarism in America will flourish only to the extent that as individual citizens we support the organizations that make voluntary action a reality. I urge Federal employees to continue to offer their skills to voluntary organizations, assisting not only in their fund-raising efforts but also in the delivery of their services. I also ask that each of you, as the head of a department or agency, provide your personal leadership in assuring the success of this new Combined Federal Campaign program.
RICHARD NIXON