Richard Nixon
March 16, 1971

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report of the National Science Foundation.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to submit to the Congress the Twentieth Annual Report of the National Science Foundation, covering the fiscal year 1970.
The activities described in this report underscore the importance of science as a national resource and as an essential element in our Nation's progress. The scientific research supported by the Foundation reflects our continuing concern for the quality of life in the United States today and in the future.
Science has entered an era of unprecedented fruitfulness. The investment we have made in the last three decades offers us an array of opportunities in the next. This guarantees us no instant or easy answers, but it does afford us the ability to bring to bear on our national problems an array of scientific talent and a heritage of scientific achievement unprecedented in human history.
New programs initiated by the Foundation in fiscal year 1970 are designed to promote and encourage the search for solutions to problems of the natural and social environment. Interdisciplinary work by scientists from many specialties shows promise of producing new knowledge of the earth, the oceans, and the atmosphere which will permit a better understanding of the relationship between man and his surroundings.
The programs of the National Science Foundation during fiscal year 1970 covered a broad range of activities. More than $200 million was devoted to the pursuit of scientific research, including major interdisciplinary efforts of national and international significance. Another $120 million was allocated to support of science education at all levels, and nearly $45 million was invested in broad-based institutional development in our colleges and universities.
I believe it was a most productive year. I commend this report to the attention of the Congress.
RICHARD NIXON

The White House

March 16, 1971
Note: The report is entitled "National Science Foundation Annual Report 1970" (Government Printing Office, 124 pp. ).