Richard Nixon
March 02, 1969

Remarks at Andrews Air Force Base on Returning From Europe.
Mr. Vice President, Mr. Speaker, all of the distinguished Members of the House, the Senate, and the Cabinet who have come to the airport today:
Over the past week we have had some splendid receptions in the great capitals of Europe, but I can assure you that none means more than to have such a warm welcome on such a cold night as we return to Washington, D.C. I am most grateful for your words which were so generous.
I can only respond at this time by giving you one overall impression of this trip. Later in the week I will be meeting the press and responding in greater detail.
That one impression is, I think, summed up by the word "trust." I sensed, as I traveled to the capitals of Europe, that there is a new trust on the part of the Europeans in themselves growing out of the fact that they have had a remarkable recovery economically and politically, as well as in their military strength, since the devastation of World War II.
Also, I think I sensed a new trust in the United States growing out of the fact that they feel that there are open channels of communication with the United States, and a new sense of consultation with the United States.
Finally, I think that there is developing a new trust in the future, not only on the part of the people of Europe and their leaders, but on the part of the people of the United States--confidence based on the fact that together we are going to be able to develop some new understanding with those who, in the past, have opposed us on the other side of the world.
I would not want this opportunity to pass without mentioning that while this was a working trip, with most of it devoted to conferences and very few public appearances, there were ties, as I rode through the streets of the great capitals of Europe, that I felt that the American people, all of the American people, in the person of their President, were being greeted by the people of Europe.
If you could have been with me as I rode through the streets of Berlin on a snowy, cold day and had seen the thousands of happy and hopeful faces in those crowds on the streets, you would have been proud that America did meet her world responsibilities and has met her world responsibilities in helping others defend their freedom. You would have been proud to be an American at this time in our history.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at approximately 10:10 p.m. at Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland.
The welcoming remarks of Vice President Agnew, which preceded those of the President, are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, P. 356).