Richard Nixon
March 26, 1970

Exchange of Letters With the Secretary of State on His African Policy Statement.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
Your thoughtfully prepared policy statement on Africa is wholeheartedly approved.
You know of my keen personal interest in relations with the African countries. We have both felt the spirit and dynamism of this continent and its people. I believe we now have a special opportunity to maintain and to expand our present relationships and am pleased that you and your staff have made so complete and positive an examination of the paths that are available to us.
You may count on my full support in the fulfillment of this program. It establishes a good foundation upon which we can respond to African needs and build that relationship of cooperation and understanding which we desire.

Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON
[The Honorable William P. Rogers, The Secretary of State, Washington, D.C. 20520]
Note: The letters and Secretary Rogers' statement entitled "The United States and Africa in the 1970's" are printed in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 62, pp. 513, 514). The Secretary's letter, dated March 26, 1970 read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
We have prepared and are submitting for your approval the attached statement on our policies in Africa. This is the first full statement of this kind by the United States Government in recent years. It represents, as you know, the results of numerous discussions with African leaders, a reflection of your own observations and interests regarding the continent, and conclusions arising from my own recent tour of Africa. It reflects with greater detail the principles of our African policy set forth in the Report on Foreign Policy in the 1970's.
The report emphasizes elements of our relationship to Africa both economic and political which will be of special importance in the coming months.
We believe the actions and objectives set forth in this paper represent a positive program within current budgetary and legislative guidelines. We have not suggested precise levels for the economic programs in view of the current studies of the worldwide foreign assistance policy. We feel it important, however, that our programs be certainly not less than the present level. We intend, within that level, to demonstrate herein how our current capabilities can respond more fully to Africa's stated needs.
In the ensuing weeks we shall be discussing aspects of the program with members of the Congress. We shall be developing other aspects in direct consultation with African governments, governments of other countries participating in African development and significant regional and international institutions.
As time goes on, we shall be building on this foundation, expanding where we can to increase the total effectiveness of our relationship with this significant continent. I believe you will find in our approach the basis for the positive expression of U.S. interest in Africa which you have so strongly encouraged.
Respectfully yours,
WILLIAM P. ROGERS
[The President, The White House]