Richard Nixon
May 23, 1970

Letter to the President of the American Bar Association About Pending Anticrime Legislation.
Dear Bernie:
I was most appreciative to have had an opportunity to discuss the issue of crime with the American Bar Association Board of Governors yesterday. The reduction of crime is of paramount importance to this society and I have pledged and pursued the strongest measures within my power and authority to resolve this problem.
Today, Mayor Walter Washington reported to me that the April statistics for the more serious crimes here in the District of Columbia dropped below those of March--the fifth consecutive month in this downward pattern. The Mayor pointed out that in November, the number of crimes reported in the more serious categories totaled 6,071--a daily average of 202.4. This daily average decreased to 187.4 in December, to 176.9 in January, to 171.1 in February, to 170.2 in March-and then to last month's 164.2 offenses. The total percentage decrease is 19%. In the District we have authorized extra police manpower, broadened our attack on drug abuse, and encouraged more vigorous prosecution of cases through the courts to eliminate a very serious backlog.
While we can be heartened by this evidence of improvement in the District of Columbia, we have been seriously constricted in our ability to wage our campaign against crime because of the Congressional delay in providing us with necessary new tools to do the job. Major legislative proposals to fight organized crime, narcotics abuse, street crime, pornography and crime in the District of Columbia have been introduced, discussed, debated. While the District of Columbia crime package has progressed to Conference, not a single bill has reached my desk for signature.
I iterate my request of yesterday for your support in urging the Congress to act speedily on the crime legislation which lies before it. As I mentioned, we have either submitted or strongly endorsed 20 items of significant crime legislation now pending in the Congress. Some of these proposals have been pending for as long as 15 months. While some of these provisions are controversial, many are not, and all demand prompt Congressional attention. It is inexplicable to me how Congress can delay enactment of these proposals-either as introduced or amended--given the gravity of the crime situation confronting our people in these times.
I would appreciate all the assistance you can provide in this vital and needed effort.

Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON

[Mr. Bernard G. Segal, President, American Bar Association, the Mayflower Hotel, Washington, D.C.]
Note: The letter was dated May 22, 1970, and released on May 23, 1970.