Richard Nixon
May 19, 1969

Remarks at the Presentation of the World Trade "E" Awards.
Ladies and gentlemen:
The purpose of this ceremony is for the presentation of the "E" Awards. The Secretary of Commerce will read the citations for the awards. But before he does so, since he has just returned from a trip to the Far East, which had to do with some of our export and import problems in addition to many other problems, I would simply like to say this:
One of the developments in the United States that has occurred in the past few years that is very disturbing is the dwindling of our export surplus. Eight years ago it was $5 billion a year. Now it is down to approximately $800 million a year.
We are trying to change that. When I say we are trying to change it, I speak not just of a government, but I speak more of those in private enterprise who by their practices will be able to win the markets abroad.
And the 10 companies that will be honored today are companies that have shown the initiative, and they have shown the imagination that is essential to compete in the export markets. And the ability to compete in the export markets is something that is, I think, particularly noteworthy today when we consider the fact that American workmen are paid by far the highest wages in the world. And when an American businessman paying those highest wages can still go in and compete in an export market, that means he deserves an award for excellence and excellence for export.
Mr. Secretary, if you will read the citations.
Note: The President spoke at 5:23 p.m. in the Roosevelt Room at the White House. Following his remarks, the citations were read by Secretary of Commerce Maurice H. Stans.
The President's "E" awards were established by Executive Order 10978 of December 5, 1961, entitled "Establishing Presidential Awards for Significant Contributions to the Export Expansion Program" (3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 498). The order states that the awards "may be made to persons, firms, and organizations engaged in the marketing of products who make significant contributions to the expansion of the export trade of the United States. It shall consist of a flag having a field of white upon which will appear a blue 'E.'"
Recipients of the awards are chosen by the Secretary of Commerce after considering the recommendations of an interagency awards committee.
A White House press release of May 16, 1969, listing this year's award winners with further information on the award, is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 5, P. 719).