Richard Nixon
May 20, 1970

Statement About the Retirement From the Congress of Speaker McCormack
I FEEL profoundly and very personally touched by the unexpected news of Speaker McCormack's retirement from Congress at the end of his present term. It is a momentous turn of events, not only for Congress, but also for our country.
John McCormack is one of the finest public servants I have ever known. Few men in my acquaintance over many years of public service have held as faithfully to the patriot's concept that our country comes first. He has served with seven Presidents of the United States, and with each, on the great issues involving the security and safety of the United States, unfailingly John McCormack has put country above party--the national good above self.
He has been Speaker of the House of Representatives for a longer consecutive period than any Speaker in the entire history of our country. I regard this as not simply proof of his exceptional leadership qualities; it is proof as well of his compassionate spirit, his undeviating integrity, and his eagerness to be helpful to everyone, whether in his district and State or his congressional colleagues in both parties.
In my White House years as Vice President, as also in the past 14 months as President, I have time and time again had occasion to be thankful for our country's sake that John McCormack was Speaker of the House. Every person in this country has an immense debt to him for his statesmanship and patriotism.
So deeply do I hold these views that I had scheduled a luncheon in honor of Speaker McCormack on May 27 well before I had heard of his intended retirement. The Speaker's announcement today will give a special poignancy to this luncheon, and there I shall join his senior colleagues and some of his host of personal friends in saluting this truly great American.
Note: Representative John W. McCorrnack of Massachusetts had served as a Member of the House of Representatives since November 6, 1928, and as Speaker from January 6, 1962.
The statement was made available by the White House Press Office.