Richard Nixon
May 14, 1974

Remarks on Signing Two Bills Providing for Drug and Alcohol Abuse Prevention.
WE WANT to say, first, that this is again a demonstration of bipartisan support for subjects that have no partisan connotations whatever. When we talk about drug abuse and alcoholism, the party lines are crossed, and when we talk about solutions, it is very encouraging to find that both Republicans and Democrats have worked long and hard for both of these measures and that now we have the tools, we believe, or some of the tools that are necessary to deal effectively with them.
So, I want to express the appreciation of the Nation to all the Members of Congress, but particularly to the members of the committee who are here present, for getting this legislation passed. And now it is up to those who have the responsibility within the Administration to see that it is properly implemented.
And finally, as much as anything else, there is the need for--in addition to the money, in addition to the Government action--there is the need for education, in which the leaders, all of whom are represented here, can play a great role, and we trust that you will do so--education in terms of how our younger people can avoid the problems with either drug abuse or alcoholism in the years ahead.
Note: The President spoke at 12:15 p.m. in the Oval Office at the White House. Present at the bill signing ceremony were Members of Congress and Federal officials responsible for the treatment and prevention programs.
As enacted, S. 1115, the Narcotic Addict Treatment Act of 1974, is Public Law 93-281 (88 Stat. 124), and S. 1125, an act concerning alcohol abuse and alcoholism prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation, is Public Law 93-282 (88 Stat. 125).
On the same day, the White House released a fact sheet and the transcript of a news briefing on provisions of the acts by Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary, and Morris E. Chafetz, Director of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, both of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; and Robert L. DuPont, Director of the Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention.