Richard Nixon
May 22, 1971

Remarks on Arrival at Austin, Texas.
MRS. NIXON and I want to tell you how very grateful we are for your giving us this very warm welcome here deep in the heart of Texas.
Incidentally, I want you to know that as I saw these clouds, that if it rains, give us the credit, will you please?
I went to Florida last weekend---I only get away for a couple of days at a time and usually I complain when it rains--but they have been having a drought there, too; and it rained and I am happy. I hope it rains today, and I am sure that President Johnson will agree, even at that ceremony there.
Let me say, too, that in our visit today we have some very distinguished people with us. And I would like to present them to you so that you can know who these people are that you see on television.
The Secretary of State is here, Secretary Rogers, and Mrs. Rogers.
Then we have a very distinguished man who is known to all Texans, who won your hearts as indicated by your votes the many times you reelected him Governor of this State, and now the strong man in our Cabinet, the Secretary of the Treasury, John Connally. Incidentally, we appointed him to the Cabinet not just because of his abilities but because he also has a very attractive wife---don't you think?
Another member of our Cabinet, one who has taken on a very great responsibility representing the United States in New York as our Ambassador to the United Nations, the former Congressman, George Bush, and Mrs. Bush. Isn't it fine to have a fine couple like that representing the United States in the United Nations? We think so.
I also have another visitor who has come with us. This puts a completely bipartisan and nonpartisan tone on this, but the man who will give the invocation today for this ceremony, and who spent the evening last night with us at the White House, Dr. Billy Graham, and his wife.
Now they tell me that we must go on to the ceremonies which will be on live television, I understand, starting in about three-quarters of an hour, or an hour.
Just let me say this in conclusion: I always enjoy an opportunity to travel to any part of the country, and I particularly appreciate the opportunity to come to Texas, a State that I visited often in many campaigns and that I visited on several occasions in a nonpolitical capacity during my term as President of the United States.
I want you to know that as I go to help dedicate a library which will contain the papers of former President Johnson, that I will do so bringing the best wishes of all the American people to a former President of the United States.
As I dedicate that library I will say there what I want to say to you now. Here in this crowd we have people of both parties, Democrats and Republicans. We have a lot of young people, and we have some older people. I am awfully glad to see that wonderful group there on the truck from the Texas School of the Deaf. Isn't it fine that they could come out here today?
But as I see this crowd and I think of the responsibilities that whoever has the office of Presidency must meet--and I know that President Johnson felt this way when he was President, I feel this way now it is very simply this: We see all of these children; we think of their future; and we want them to grow up in a world in which we will be at peace with every nation in the world.
We cannot do that unless this Nation is strong. And this State of Texas, through its Congressmen, through its Senators, both Republican and Democrat, must be credited with supporting a strong national defense which will make it possible for winning the kind of peace we want in America and in the world.
Finally, we want to grow up in a world where these young people will have a better chance than we have had for a good life. And this is a great country, make no mistake about it, it is today. And we have the opportunity to make it better and a world in which they can travel to all parts of the world and get to know the people of all parts of the world where there will be no barriers that divide us.
This is a great goal. It is not a Republican goal; it is not a Democratic goal. It is what you in this great State, made up, as you are, with people from all parts of the Nation, it is what you believe in; it is what we believe in.
We will appreciate your support, and we will appreciate your prayers as we work toward that great goal for all Americans.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 10: 06 a.rn. at Bergstrom Air Force Base.