Richard Nixon
May 21, 1969

Statement on the Realignment of Regional Boundaries of Certain Federal Agencies.
ON March 27 I announced a series of steps being taken to streamline the structure and processes of Federal agencies in the field. I am confident that these changes will greatly improve the effectiveness of Federal social and economic services.
The first of these actions was the establishment of a common pattern of regional boundaries and headquarters for the Department of Labor, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Office of Economic Opportunity, and the Small Business Administration.
Since the announcement we have met with congressional, State, and local interests from many areas of the country and received from them a great deal of valuable information on implementing this plan.
After considering this information, I have concluded that the level of Federal service which would be required of the planned subregional offices in Kansas City and Seattle warrants their elevation to full regional status.
Three other changes are desirable. With the establishment of the new Seattle region, it is appropriate to shift Idaho to that region from the Denver region. Also, after reviewing the situation, I have concluded that the States of North Carolina and Kentucky would be better served from Atlanta than from Philadelphia.
In summary, the new alignment for the regions is as follows:
Region I (Boston)--Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont;
Region H (New York City)--New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands;
Region III (Philadelphia)--Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and West Virginia;
Region IV (Atlanta)--Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee;
Region V (Chicago)--Illinois, Indiana, Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, and Wisconsin;
Region VI (Dallas-Fort Worth) -- Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas;
Region VII (Kansas City)--Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska;
Region VIII (Denver)--Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming;
Region IX (San Francisco) --Arizona, California, Hawaii, and Nevada;
Region X (Seattle)--Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington.