Richard Nixon
November 01, 1973

Remarks Announcing Intention To Nominate William B. Saxbe To Be Attorney General.
Ladies and gentlemen:
I have an announcement today with regard to the new Attorney General.
I shall send to the Senate, as soon as the papers are prepared, the nomination of William Saxbe, Senator Saxbe of Ohio, as the Attorney General of the United States.
The Senator and I, as I have found from reading press reports, have had several discussions on this in recent days, and I have found that he is eminently qualified, which I had known before, having known him for 25 years. I met him first when he was speaker of the house of representatives for the State of Ohio, knew him when I was Vice President, also, when he was attorney general of the State of Ohio, on two different terms.
Not only is he eminently qualified, but he is an individual who wants to take this position and to do everything that he possibly can to serve the Nation as the first lawyer in the Nation. As a matter of fact, as you know, Bill Saxbe had already indicated that he wasn't going to run for the Senate again in Ohio this year and that he wanted to practice law. So I have given him the opportunity, with the Senate's consent--which I think will be overwhelming-to head the largest law firm in America, the Department of Justice.
He will have, of course, under the rules, only a brief statement to make, since he has to answer questions in his confirmation hearings and has to delay any other questions which might relate to those hearings. But you can make a statement, Bill, as I understand, when I complete my own statement with regard to you, and also with regard to Mr. Bork.
Mr. Bork, the Acting Attorney General, who has handled this position with very great ability during a very difficult time, has an announcement with regard to the Special Prosecutor. Mr. Bork will make the announcement and then will be prepared to answer any questions you ladies and gentlemen may have with regard to the Special Prosecutor and his activities in the future.
This matter we have already discussed with various Congressional leaders and, of course, discussed it this morning with the Republican Congressional leaders in our regular leaders meeting, and they generally felt that the selection which Mr. Bork will announce is one that is perhaps the best we could get for this very important position.
And so, Mr. Saxbe, Senator Saxbe, who shortly we hope we will call Mr. Attorney General, you will have an opportunity to speak to the members of the press here at the White House now, and when you finish your statement, Bob, if you will then make your announcement with regard to the Special Prosecutor and take any questions that the ladies and gentlemen may have on that, I would appreciate that. Thank you.
ATTORNEY GENERAL-DESIGNATE SAXBE. Thank you, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT. Congratulations.
Note: The President spoke at 10:05 a.m. in the Briefing Room at the White House.
Attorney General-designate Saxbe spoke briefly in response to the President's remarks. His remarks, released with the President's, and an announcement containing additional biographical data are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 9, pp. 1301, 1302).
Following Senator Saxbe's remarks, Acting Attorney General Robert H. Bork announced his appointment of Leon Jaworski as Director of the Office of Watergate Special Prosecution Force and took questions from reporters. His announcement is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 9, P. 1303). Biographical data on Mr. Jaworski was also released.