Richard Nixon
November 07, 1971

Letter to State, County, and Local officials About Hiring Under the Emergency Employment Act of 1971.
AS YOU know, the Emergency Employment Act of 1971 was enacted by the Congress this past summer. I signed it into law on July 12; appropriations for it were provided in early August. At my direction, the Secretary of Labor has already made funding available to communities across the country, under the provisions of this statute, for more than 100,000 jobs.
I am sure that you share my commitment to reduce the level of unemployment in our country; this statute provides one important means for moving swiftly to provide needed public service employment and to reduce unemployment, particularly in areas which have been most severely affected. Unfortunately, despite the fact that the Department of Labor made funding available almost immediately, hiring has not kept pace in some areas of the Nation.
Therefore, I urge you to move with speed and vigor to fill the job vacancies now funded in your jurisdiction. If you should encounter any funding or administrative difficulties under this program, please feel free to contact the Secretary of Labor and his staff directly.
As you make use of this program, I especially hope that you will also make every effort to meet and exceed the one-third goal established for employment of veterans. This Nation owes a great debt to those who have served in the Vietnamese conflict and who have been returning home in increasing numbers. I have assigned the highest priority to the hiring of Vietnam veterans, and I hope that you will do the same with respect to the funds available to you under this statute.
This Administration is dedicated to the task of creating the new jobs needed for an expanding America--a goal which I know you share. This program is vital to our combined efforts; I earnestly solicit your active cooperation.

Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON
Note: The letter was dated November 3, 1971, and was made available to the press at Key Biscayne, Fla., on November 7.
Copies of the letter were sent to some 14,000 State, county, and local officials, including Governors, mayors, and county officials in jurisdictions of 100,000 or more.