Richard Nixon
November 24, 1970

Executive Order 11570—Providing for the Regulation of Conduct for the Postal Rate Commission and its Employees
Under the Postal Reorganization Act (Public Law 91-375), the Postal Rate Commission (referred to hereafter as the "Commission") is charged with the establishment and adjustment of fair and equitable rates of postage, fees for postal services, and classifications of mail. It is essential to public confidence in the United States Postal Service that the activities, procedures, decisions, and recommendations of the Commission be impartial and disinterested and free from taint or suspicion of favoritism of any kind whatsoever, both in fact and in appearance.
NOW THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by Section 301 of Title 3, and Section 7301 of Title 5, United States Code, and the Postal Reorganization Act, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 101. The Commission is subject to Executive Order No. 11222 of May 8, 1965, "Prescribing Standards of Ethical Conduct for Government Officers and Employees," and Part 735 of the regulations of the Civil Service Commission (5 CFR Part 735).
Section 102. The Civil Service Commission shall prepare initial standards of conduct regulations for the Commission. The regulations shall contain such provisions as will ensure that the Commissioners and employees of the Commission are fully guarded against involvement in conflicts of interest situations, or the appearance thereof, or other conduct that may lessen public confidence. The regulations shall include provision for:
(a) concurrent filing of confidential statements of outside employment and financial interests by employees of the Commission with a designated official of the Commission and the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission;
(b) strict control of ex parte contacts with the Commission and the Commissioners or employees of the Commission regarding particular matters at issue in contested proceedings before the Commission. The control of such contacts shall include, but not be limited to, the maintenance of public records of such contacts which fully identify the individuals involved and the nature of the subject matter discussed; and
(c) prohibition against the receipt of honoraria, travel expenses, entertainment, gifts, loans, favors, or any thing of value by a Commissioner or employee of the Commission from an individual (other than one having a close family or personal relationship) or organization having, or likely to have, business with the Commission.
Section 103. The Civil Service Commission shall issue the initial standards of conduct regulations applicable to the Commission not later than 120 days after the effective date of this Order. Thereafter, the Commission may from time to time amend the regulations, consistent with this Order. The regulations and any amendments thereto shall be published in the Federal Register.
RICHARD NIXON
The White House
November 24, 1970
NOTE: The Executive order was not issued in the form of a White House press release.