Richard Nixon
October 12, 1970

Remarks in Hartford, Connecticut.
MRS. NIXON and I want to express our great appreciation for your welcoming us here to this State, her father's State. We are very proud that her father came from Connecticut.
I am very proud, too, to have Mayor Ann Ucello here, one of my favorite mayors in the whole country, running for Congress here in this city.

On this occasion, too, as I came through the streets, I noted a number of signs, most of them friendly, some not. But this I do know, I know that the people of this State, like the people of America and the people of the world, want peace in the world, and we are working for peace every day, I can assure you.
I also want you to know that the people in this State, like all the people of this country, want a better life for their children, better opportunity. We are working for that.
I also want you to know that in the Congress of the United States I have known two young men--I call them young, although they perhaps have been there some time. But Tom Meskill, who has done such an outstanding job as a member of the Judiciary Committee--incidentally, I gave his best regards to all of his Irish relatives when I was just there the other day. And Lowell Weicker. An indication of how well he is thought of is that he was elected the president of all of the Congressmen at the same time at which he was elected to the Congress of the United States.
You know when you see two men in the House of Representatives doing a fine job for their districts, it is very hard to think of losing them. But when Congressman Meskill can be Governor Meskill, and when Congressman Weicker can be Senator Weicker, that is a good trade. So that is what we are for.
Note: The President spoke at 1:07 p.m. during a pause in his motorcade through the city to the Hartford Hilton Hotel, where he met with news executives from the Northeastern States who were attending an administration briefing on foreign policy.
Representative Lowell P. Weicker, Jr., was elected president of the 91st Club which was made up of the freshmen Republican Members of the 91st Congress.