Richard Nixon
October 17, 1970

Statement in Support of Republican Candidates in Vermont.
I HAVE COME to Vermont to support a great United States Senator, Win Prouty, a great Governor, Deane Davis, and the entire Republican ticket. While here, I also want to reassure the people of Vermont and of New England about a matter that has become a cause of great concern to many: the question of fuel supply.
I have talked with Senator Prouty and Governor Davis about this. I have investigated the situation. I want to say that despite all the discussion, and despite all the a/arms, there is now no fuel crisis. And we are taking all necessary steps to ensure that Vermont and New England have adequate supplies of fuel this winter.
I have known and admired Senator Win Prouty for many years, and I know him as a man of thoughtful good sense and a real voice of Vermont. He works hard at his job, and works hard for the people of his State. He gets things done. Senator Prouty has been one of the great leaders in the Senate in education, in health, in transportation, in getting a better break for the elderly. He understands what it takes to achieve our goal in the world of a full generation of peace.
People in Washington listen to Senator Prouty because they know that what he says is worth listening to. With Winston Prouty in the Senate and Bob Stafford in the House, the people of Vermont can be sure that the voice of Vermont will be heard--and heeded.
Let me say a word, too, about Governor Davis. Two years ago Governor Davis inherited a fiscal mess from his predecessor-and he had the courage and the determination to do what was needed to clean it up. He knows what it takes to make State government work. He knows how to fight crime. Under his leadership, Vermont is setting an example for the Nation in fighting pollution.
If we are to get power back to the States and back to the people--where it belongs--we need more Governors like Deane Davis. And as we look ahead to the Nation's needs in these next critical years, we need the clear, respected voice of Winston Prouty in the United States Senate.
Note: The statement was released at Burlington, Vt.