Richard Nixon
October 10, 1973

Letter to Spiro T. Agnew About His Decision to Resign as Vice President
Dear Ted:
The most difficult decisions are often those that are the most personal, and I know your decision to resign as Vice President has been as difficult as any facing a man in public life could be. Your departure from the Administration leaves me with a great sense of personal loss. You have been a valued associate throughout these nearly five years that we have served together. However, I respect your decision, and I also respect the concern for the national interest that led you to conclude that a resolution of the matter in this way, rather than through an extended battle in the Courts and the Congress, was advisable in order to prevent a protracted period of national division and uncertainty.
As Vice President, you have addressed the great issues of our times with courage and candor. Your strong patriotism, and your profound dedication to the welfare of the Nation, have been an inspiration to all who have served with you as well as to millions of others throughout the country.
I have been deeply saddened by this whole course of events, and I hope that you and your family will be sustained in the days ahead by a well-justified pride in all that you have contributed to the Nation by your years of service as Vice President.
Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON
[The Vice President, Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C.]
Note: The texts of Mr. Agnew's letter to the President and his letter of resignation to Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, dated the same day and released with the President's letter, read as follows:
Dear Mr. President:
As you are aware, the accusations against me cannot be resolved without a long, divisive and debilitating struggle in the Congress and in the Courts. I have concluded that, painful as it is to me and to my family, it is in the best interests of the Nation that I relinquish the Vice Presidency.
Accordingly, I have today resigned the Office of Vice President of the United States. A copy of the instrument of resignation is enclosed.
It has been a privilege to serve with you. May I express to the American people, through you, my deep gratitude for their confidence in twice electing me to be Vice President.
Sincerely,
SPIRO T. AGNEW
[The President, The White House, Washington, D.C.]
Dear Mr. Secretary:
I hereby resign the Office of Vice President of the United States, effective immediately.
Sincerely,
SPIRO T. AGNEW
[The Honorable Henry A. Kissinger, The Secretary of State, Washington, D.C. 20520]
Following the resignation of Vice President Agnew, the President held meetings separately with Senators Hugh Scott and Robert P. Griffin and Representatives Gerald R. Ford and Leslie C. Arends; and Speaker of the House Carl Albert and Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield.