Richard Nixon
October 19, 1970

Statement in Support of Republican Candidates in
IN TERMS of experience, character, and ability, Robert Taft and Roger Cloud are among the most highly qualified candidates running for office in any State this autumn. I am proud to endorse them and the entire Republican slate in Ohio.
Bob Taft's record of service to and his Nation is well known, in Ohio and around the country. He has been a key leader in both the Ohio State Legislature and in the national Congress. I have followed his career with great interest and with deep admiration. I am proud to be a Taft supporter again this year.
Over the years, Bob Taft has developed a special expertise in the field of foreign affairs. He shares my conviction that only a strong America can bring peace with honor to our world. A man of high principle and sound judgment, he has written a bright new chapter in a long and distinguished family history. The Nation needs another Bob Taft from Ohio in the Senate of the United States.
Roger Cloud is also an outstanding public servant. Certainly few candidates anywhere, for any office, can boast records of experience in State government as great as his. Roger Cloud's political career began with his election to the school board in 1936, and he has gone from one success to another ever since. Along the way he even set a record for the most terms served as speaker of the Ohio Legislature. Roger Cloud has learned from experience that good government need not be costly government. He knows that a man can be an effective leader without being a big spender.
Both Bob Taft and Roger Cloud know that America cannot bring peace abroad unless we also restore peace at home in our streets, our schools, our cities. I know that both of them--and all of the COP candidates in Ohio---will work closely with the Nixon administration in meeting the challenges of the seventies. To the voters of Ohio, who are accustomed to judging "All-Americans," I say that I look upon those men as "All-American" candidates. I regard their election as a matter of especially high priority.
Note: The statement was released at Columbus, Ohio.
Roger Cloud was Republican candidate for Governor of Ohio.