Richard Nixon
October 29, 1969

Remarks on Arrival at Morristown, New Jersey.
Congressman Cahill, Mrs. Cahill, Congressman Frelinghuysen, Senator Case-I am being very formal with all of my colleagues and former colleagues--Mr. Mayor:
I do want you to know that this is a wonderfully heartwarming welcome.
And I think I got a little bit of bad advance dope about this meeting, Peter [H. B. Frelinghuysen]. I thought the rally was downtown. I didn't know it was out here.
And I think also you will be interested to note that my background information told me some interesting background with regard to this county and the visits of Presidents. This is a county which has been very good to Republican candidates. It was very good to me in 1960 and in 1968.
But I think you will be interested to know this is the first time in history that a President of the United States has ever visited Morris County. I am glad to be here.
I have had the privilege of visiting this county as a candidate on other occasions. And I have always had a wonderful welcome. But, believe me, this tops them all. And we are most grateful.
I simply want to leave with you, if I can, one thought: I am here not in my own behalf, but in behalf of a man for whom I have very great respect. I like Bill Cahill as a person. I like him because of his experience in the Congress of the United States.
He is a man who is trained for the job that he is seeking. I like him because I believe that he is the man for the future of this State. He is a man who has no commitments to those mistakes of the past, and he is a man that can lead New Jersey in the seventies. And that kind of a man, I think, New Jersey wants.
Let me put it this way: I just happen to think that Bill Cahill, because of his integrity, because of his experience, because of his program, because of his idealism--I think he is ready to lead New Jersey and, from what I see here, New Jersey is ready for Cahill.
I wish we had more time. I do know that there are many, many problems that you would like to hear discussed.
On Monday night, I urge you, incidentally, to listen to Bill Cahill's final wrap-up.
I also will tell you that I will be speaking to the Nation Monday on a subject-the subject of Vietnam--and I would invite you all to listen to that particular matter.
But let me say, finally, that apart from these political remarks that I have made, you can't really understand or estimate how heartwarming it is for a man who serves as President of the United States to come to a State, which has been very good for him and to him on election day, and gets such a wonderfully warm welcome.
And I particularly say that because I know how hard it is to get to an airport. I know how far you had to walk to get here.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 7:30 p.m. at Morristown Airport, Morristown, N.J. The mayor of Morristown was Victor L. Woodhull.