Richard Nixon
October 08, 1969

Message to the Senate Transmitting the Consular Convention Between the United States and Belgium.
To the Senate of the United States:
With a view to receiving the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification, I transmit herewith the consular convention between the United States of America and the Kingdom of Belgium, signed at Washington on September 2, 1969, and two exchanges of notes related thereto.
The convention deals with the conduct of consular relations between the two countries and the functions, privileges, and immunities of their respective consular officers. Upon entry into force it will replace the consular convention of March 9, 1880 between the United States and Belgium. Like other recent consular conventions of the United States, the new convention with Belgium covers such important matters as the obligations of the two countries to assure free communication between a citizen and his consul, to inform consular officers of the arrest or detention of their countrymen, and to permit visits by consuls to any of their countrymen who are in prison. It covers consular functions and responsibilities in such fields as the issuance of visas and passports, and the performance of notarial services. It provides for the inviolability of consular communications, documents, and archives, and the obligations of the host country to protect consular premises against intrusion or damage.
I recommend that the Senate give early and favorable consideration to the convention and related exchanges of notes and give its advice and consent to the ratification thereof.
I transmit also, for the information of the Senate, the report of the Secretary of State with respect to the convention and exchanges of notes.
RICHARD NIXON
The White House
October 8, 1969
Note: The convention was favorably considered by the Senate on November 10, 1969. The President signed the Instrument of Ratification on December 2, 1969. The text is printed in Senate Executive F (91st Cong., 1st sess.) which also includes the exchanges of notes and the report of the Secretary of State.