Richard Nixon
September 24, 1969

Proclamation 3936—Veterans Day, 1969

From Valley Forge to Vietnam, American servicemen have responded to their nation's call to duty.
That call has often led to loneliness, hardship, danger—and, for some, death. In response to that call, American servicemen have acted with unsurpassed valor and devotion and have demonstrated to enemies of freedom all over the world that free men and women will defend the principles of a free society.
After each war or conflict, these dedicated Americans who performed so valiantly as servicemen have returned to build a stronger country. Today there are approximately 27 million American veterans. Their contribution to our nation, in war and peace, has been invaluable.
To acknowledge the respect and admiration we have for our veterans, the Congress has designated November 11 to be a legal holiday and to be known as Veterans Day, and has dedicated it to the cause of world peace (Act of May 13, 1938, 52 Stat. 351, as amended (5 U.S.C. 6103)).
Now, Therefore, I, Richard Nixon,President of the United States of America, urge the people of this nation to join in commemorating Tuesday, November 11, 1969, as Veterans Day with suitable observances.
I direct the appropriate officials of the government to arrange for the display of the flag of the United States on all public buildings on that day; and I request the officials of Federal, State, and local governments, and civic and patriotic organizations, to give their enthusiastic leadership and support to appropriate public ceremonies throughout the nation.
I urge all citizens of every age to participate in these observances in honor of those men who have preserved our Union and our freedom. I ask that special prayers for peace be offered for our men still involved in defending the inalienable right of liberty; and for those whose memory we honor with a star of gold, let us pause in silent tribute on this Veterans Day, praying that they did not die in vain and that their sacrifices will bring us peace.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand this 24th day of September, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred sixty-nine, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred ninety-fourth.


RICHARD NIXON