Richard Nixon
September 26, 1970

Letter to Senate and House Committee Chairmen Urging Action on the Emergency School Aid Act.
I AM WRITING to ask your help in obtaining action on the Emergency School Aid Act before the end of this session. This bill is one of the highest legislative priorities of the Administration.
On May 21, 1970, I asked for this $1.5 billion in emergency aid to school districts, North and South, undergoing desegregation either voluntarily or in compliance with court decisions.
As an interim measure, the Congress appropriated $75 million--half of my request for "start-up" money. More than 300 projects have been funded within only four weeks; these projects now demonstrate the urgent need for the full-scale legislation. At this rate of commitment the "start-up" appropriation will be exhausted by mid-October. But it is obvious that desegregating school districts will continue to need help.
Almost universally, administrators, teachers, students and parents in those districts have already set for the nation an outstanding example of how difficult social changes can be achieved in our nation-- without violence. State Advisory Councils made up of educators, businessmen and other community leaders have given invaluable voluntary support to this effort.
Public school desegregation this Fall continues to be an impressive example of what can be achieved by cooperation rather than coercion. Nearly 700 districts are changing from dual to unitary school systems--more than in any single year of the past 16 years since the first Supreme Court decision. But there is nothing automatic about this achievement.
With desegregation proceeding thus far with such success, it would be a tragedy if Congress failed to authorize the broader legislation I proposed last May. Failure to act now would mean no additional funds for local school districts this year--when they are most needed.
I should emphasize also that the legislation I requested would authorize far broader use of the funds than is now possible with the $75 million so far appropriated. It would encourage school districts, in the North as well as the South, to move forward on a voluntary basis to reduce racial isolation.
While the Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare testified in detail on our proposal in early June, and while he has since then provided a great deal of additional information, the subcommittee has not yet reported the bill to your full committee.
This legislation is designed to meet urgent needs affecting the education of our children; it has bipartisan support. Therefore, I urge you to do everything in your power to bring this bill to the floor for action at the earliest possible time in this session of the Congress.

Sincerely,
RICHARD NIXON
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to Senator Ralph Yarborough, Chairman, Labor and Public Welfare Committee of the Senate; and Representative Carl D. Perkins, Chairman, Education and Labor Committee of the House of Representatives.