Richard Nixon
September 02, 1969

Remarks on Reform of the Nation's Postal System.
Ladies and gentlemen:
I am flanked this morning by a bipartisan group which is gathered together for what I consider to be one of the top priority measures of this administration.
Several months ago you will recall my meeting with the press in Washington, along with Postmaster General Blount, and indicating the complete support of this administration for postal reform, the setting up of a Government corporation in place of the present system.
Within the next 2 weeks a major decision will be made in the House of Representatives by the Post Office and Civil Service Committee with regard to the bill which will be reported to the House. This will be the first round in a very significant battle as to whether we are to continue a system which has proved that it is inefficient, inadequate to meet the tremendous responsibilities that we have today, or whether we are to have a new system that will give this country what it deserves--fast, efficient postal service.
This is a bipartisan measure, bipartisan in the sense that it was first recommended by President Johnson, and as indicated today, it is supported not only by the administration and the Postmaster General, but by two former chairmen of the National Committees, the former Democratic national chairman, Mr. [Lawrence F.] O'Brien, and the former Republican national chairman, Senator [Thruston B.] Morton.
And also, Mr. O'Brien, I should say, has had the position Mr. Blount has had, Postmaster General, and is enthusiastically for this legislation.
I simply want to say in conclusion, before they submit to your questions, that I believe that postal reform is high on the list of those items which I indicated in my speech last night needs a new approach, an approach that will be adequate to the seventies.
Our present postal system is obsolete; it has broken down; it is not what it ought to be for a nation of 200 million people, and a nation that will be 300 million within 30 years. And now is the time to act. We are very happy to have the bipartisan support that we have, as indicated by this meeting this morning.
The Postmaster General will take over, and I understand all three of you will answer questions--either on the Post Office or political.
Note: The President spoke at 10:45 a.m. in the Conference Room at the Western White House in San Clemente, Calif.
The White House Press Office released the text of a news briefing held by Postmaster General Blount, Mr. O'Brien, and Senator Morton following the President's remarks.