William Howard Taft
July 01, 1910

Executive Order 1221—Jemez Reserve, New Mexico
It is hereby ordered that the following described tract of country in the Territory of New Mexico, to wit:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the Laguna Pueblo grant, as located by the survey thereof approved by the Court of Private Land Claims on August 22, 1899; thence due west to a point on the east boundary of the Acoma Pueblo grant, confirmed as Report "B" by the act of Congress approved December 22, 1858; thence north along the east boundary of said Acoma grant to its intersection with the south boundary of the Santa Ana grant or purchase, confirmed to the pueblo of Laguna as tract No. 5 of Report No. 30 by the act of Congress approved June 21, 1860; thence in a southeasterly direction along the south boundary of said Santa Ana purchase to the southeast corner thereof; thence north along the east boundary of said purchase to the northeast corner thereof; thence in a northwesterly direction along the north boundary of said purchase to its intersection with the east boundary of the aforesaid Acoma grant; thence north along the east boundary of said grant to its intersection with the south boundary of the Cubero grant, as located by the survey thereof approved by the Court of Private Land Claims on June 24, 1898; thence east along the south boundary of said Cubero grant to the southeast corner thereof; thence north along the east boundary of said grant to its intersection with the south boundary of the Paguate grant or purchase, confirmed to the Pueblo of Laguna as tract No. 1 of the aforesaid Report No. 30; thence east along the south boundary of said Paguate grant or purchase to the northwest corner of the San Juan grant or purchase, confirmed to the Pueblo of Laguna as tract No. 3 of said Report No. 30; thence south along the west boundary of said San Juan grant or purchase to the northwest corner of the El Rito grant or purchase, confirmed to the Pueblo of Laguna as tract No. 2 of said Report No. 30; thence south along the west boundary of said El Rito grant or purchase to a point thereon due east of the southeast corner of the Laguna Pueblo grant; thence west to the southeast corner of said grant; thence north along the east boundary of said grant to the northeast corner thereof; thence west along the north boundary of said grant to the northwest corner thereof; thence south along the west boundary of said grant to the southwest corner thereof, the place of beginning, be, and the same is hereby, set apart as a reservation for the use and occupation of the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico belonging to the Pueblo Laguna: Provided, That nothing herein shall affect any existing valid rights of any person to the lands described.
WM. H. TAFT

The White House,

July 1, 1910.