Lyndon B. Johnson
April 01, 1966

Proclamation 3711—Senior Citizens Month, May 1966

A basic goal of an enlightened society must be to provide opportunities which enable older people to keep and strengthen their independence and dignity.
For too many Americans, the later years still mean loneliness, idleness, lack of purpose and meaning.
Today we have the tools to change this. We have the power to enrich the lives of older Americans and to benefit from their skills, their wisdom and their experience.
Nearly 18,500,000 American men and women are 65 years old and over. Each day almost 3900 Americans reach 65.
For all of them, a new life is now possible. Programs proposed by this Administration and enacted into law by the 89th Congress are being launched and expanded in the largest effort on behalf of the aging in our history. Now we can provide greater opportunities for our older Americans to use their abilities and to participate in useful work and rewarding leisure. We can declare a new day for older Americans.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the month of May 1966 as Senior Citizens Month.
I call upon all Federal, State and local governments, in partnership with private and voluntary organizations, to join in community effort to give meaning to the theme of this special month: A NEW DAY FOR THE OLDER AMERICAN.
Let us make this month memorable by the dedicated efforts of each citizen to provide those benefits and opportunities within community programs which will add satisfaction and dignity to the lives of aging Americans.
I also invite the Governors of the States, the Governor of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commissioners of the District of Columbia, and appropriate officials in other areas subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to join in the observance of Senior Citizens Month.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this first day of April in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-six, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninetieth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
DEAN RUSK
Secretary of State
NOTE: Proclamation 3711 was not filed with the Office of the Federal Register before the cutoff time of this issue. As printed above, it follows the text of the White House press release.