Lyndon B. Johnson
April 07, 1967

Proclamation 3777—National CARIH Asthma Week

In the United States today, more than three million children live as captives of asthma. It affects two million adult Americans. Each year this disease takes 5,000 at home and on the job.
The asthma victim lives under the constant threat of attack by the disease. It can come from his food, the air he breathes, even from emotional reactions to his environment. In the throes of such an attack, he must have help.
Medical research is valiantly seeking the cause and cure of asthma.
The Children's Asthma Research Institute and Hospital at Denver, Colorado, has been in the vanguard of these efforts. It has provided help to children from every region, of every race and creed.
CARIH has set a remarkable record in rehabilitation. It has demanded no payment but the satisfaction of improving the conditions of life for asthma sufferers.
In recognition of this selfless service, the Congress, by a joint resolution approved March 14, 1967, requested the President to issue a proclamation designating the week beginning May 1, 1967 as National CARIH Asthma Week.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the week beginning May 1, 1967, as National CARIH Asthma Week; and I invite the Governors of the States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and officials of other areas subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to issue similar proclamations.
I urge the people of the United States to join in the observance of that week with activities and ceremonies designed to recognize the outstanding contributions made in asthma treatment, care, and research by the Children's Asthma Research Institute and Hospital.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this seventh day of April in the year our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-seven, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-first.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
NICHOLAS DEB. KATZENBACH
Acting Secretary of State
NOTE: Proclamation 3777 was not filed with the Office of the Federal Register before the cutoff time of this issue. As printed above, it follows the text of the White House press release.