Lyndon B. Johnson
April 26, 1967

Exchange of Remarks With Chancellor Kurt Kiesinger Following Discussions in Bonn.
IT WAS more than two decades ago that I first came to Europe. It is astonishing to observe the great progress that has been made since I first came here.
That progress is a great tribute to the leadership of the great man that we laid to rest yesterday and whose passing we all mourn.
He would want us to do what we have done today and that is to reaffirm the friendship that exists between the Federal Republic of Germany and its peoples and the peoples of the United States of America.
We have not made any hard and fast decisions today, although we have explored many of the interests of our respective people. We talked about, first, that the people in America hoped that it may be possible for the Chancellor and his lady to visit our country at an early date. We will both be in touch with each other about that date and a new announcement will be forthcoming.
At that time, we will review in depth and perhaps have more announcements for you concerning the various subjects that are in the public mind and of great interest to the two nations; the nonproliferation treaty, the trade and monetary matters, the troop deployments, the security of the two nations, and the prosperity of our people.
The Chancellor reviewed the viewpoint of his people in connection with all of those subjects. I attempted to tell him how we felt about them.
It is clear from our discussions that the friendship that has existed and the close relationship that has existed between our two countries for more than the past two decades will be continued; that there will be constant, complete, and full consultation between us before decisions by either of us.
Both of us believe that those consultations will not only be friendly but will be understanding, and will result in the agreement and the approval of the peoples of both nations.
True, there will be differences of opinion, there will be decisions to be made and adjustments to be entered into, but we both know that in unity there is strength and we both expect strength for our respective peoples.
We want, more than anything else, peace in the world and prosperity for all of its peoples. By working together, we believe we can best make our contributions to that end.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke shortly after 1 p.m. at the German Chancellery in Bonn. As printed this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office. Preceding his remarks Chancellor Kiesinger made the following remarks:
The President and I had a long, open, and frank discussion on the problems which concern our two countries.
I would like to say, first of all, what a great honor and token of friendship it was for President Johnson and such a great number of most distinguished American citizens to come to us to participate in Konrad Adenauer's funeral.
I would like to assure you, Mr. President, that these people will not forget what you have done.
So far as our conversations are concerned, I think that we have, in a very good atmosphere of mutual trust and confidence, discussed all the matters that concern our two countries.
The President himself will, I am sure, agree with me that we have come to the view that we will continue to have frank and confident cooperation which, of course, takes into consideration the matters of our two nations and that any problems that might crop up will be discussed frankly without any attempt to bring about results which a partner would ignore.
I can only say, in conclusion, that I am very happy and satisfied with this meeting: first of all, the very fact that I had the privilege of getting to know President Johnson and secondly, of the results of our conversations altogether.