Lyndon B. Johnson
April 02, 1965

Remarks at a Ceremony in Honor of Stephen Addiss and William E. Crofut II.
Honored guests, ladies and gentlemen:
On many occasions I have spoken of what I like to describe as "the volunteer generation" in America.
Young Americans throughout our history have never been found lacking in valor, or in courage, or in bravery. Today a very new quality is present. Young Americans are not content to wait for the summons of history. They want to--and they are--committing themselves to the great causes and challenges of our times with a fervor, an intelligence, an unselfishness which should thrill all of us.
This morning I have invited here to the White House two talented, dedicated, and very modest young men and their families, who epitomize the "volunteer generation."
They are Stephen Addiss and William Crofut.
Their story is inspiring and exciting. Only a week ago they returned home from more than 90 days in southeast Asia, principally in Viet-Nam. They were there--as they had been on other missions--as part of our cultural presentations program.
Both are outstanding musicians. One has written operas, edited a music magazine, and taught in a noted college of music. They laid aside their careers and went into Viet-Nam--as they had done for us before in Africa and in the Far East.
They did not entertain in the cities or the showplaces, but by jeep and by raft and canoe they sought out the villages, teaching our songs and learning the fine songs of the Vietnamese people. While they don't want me to mention this, on many occasions they performed under situations of great personal risk and great personal danger.
They sought no soft and easy life. I was struck by reports. from our people in the field that "the fear of dysentery never deterred them"--they lived the life of the Vietnamese people. And by what they did, above and beyond what could be asked of them, Steve Addiss and Bill Crofut served America and freedom in the very finest and proudest way. But that is not all the story.
They are back home. Their offers to entertain are many. Their careers are at the very height of promise. But already they are wanting to return to Viet-Nam--to devote their lives to the people in those little villages. This is, as I have said, the real spirit of this inspiring volunteer generation in America today.
Four years ago next month, I was in Viet-Nam as the personal representative of President Kennedy. Like these young men, I came away lastingly impressed by the Vietnamese people--with their courage, their fortitude, and their creativity and vigor.
I told them then some things I would like to repeat here today.
I promised that we would press forward with them to "meet the needs of your people in education, rural development, new industry, and long-range economic development."
I also said: "We have faith--a growing faith--in Viet-Nam and the strength that you can build here. We want to work beside you in the great works of the future for your people .... Find the young people who, unafraid, will dedicate their lives to the building of a free and prosperous Viet-Nam. When you find these citizens, encourage and honor them. Against the promises of the power-seekers match the living works of free men. We shall then see the triumph of liberty in all of Viet-Nam."
Those are pledges that I hope we may someday redeem and fulfill in a free and secure and peaceful Viet-Nam.
I believe that these two young Americans have, by their works, carried to the people of Viet-Nam a better and closer understanding of the people of America.
I am proud to recognize them this morning for what they have done, and to salute them for representing the very best of the United States of America.
I want Steve and Bill to sing for us both a song of Viet-Nam and the American song which was most popular in the villages of that land. When they have finished I have a surprise for them.
Note: The President spoke at 12:02 p.m. in the East Room at the White House.
In response to the President's request Stephen Addiss, playing a guitar, and William E. Crofut, a banjo, sang a Vietnamese rice planting song and "Road to Freedom."
In the press release, at the point immediately following the President's concluding words, the White House Official Reporter noted that a letter from the Secretary of State and a citation from the Secretary of Defense were also read at the ceremony.