Lyndon B. Johnson
April 24, 1964

Remarks at Mayo State Vocational School, Paintsville, Kentucky.
I AM very sorry that we are late. We have enjoyed our day immensely. We started it this morning at 5:30 in Chicago. We left there about 6:50 and we have been a lot of places and seen a great many fine people. But nowhere have we been and no place have we seen better people or more friendly faces than here in the great State of Kentucky.
I know your heart must swell with pride when you see your brilliant young Governor taking such an interest in advancing this State. I know you must be deeply grateful to your own fine Congressman Perkins for all the good work that he has done for this District.
The only thing that I am sorry about is that I can't spend longer with you and learn more about the conditions here. I have with me the very able Under Secretary of Commerce, Mr. Franklin D. Roosevelt, Jr. I would like for him to come up here and take a bow. The distinguished Secretary of Labor, Mr. Willard Wirtz. The very fine Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, Secretary Celebrezze. Your own_ progressive, patriotic Senator, Senator John Sherman Cooper.
Now I have saved the best to the last. Since I have made about 10 speeches already today and she hasn't made but 11, I am going to let Lady Bird conclude this one.
[At this point Mrs. Johnson spoke briefly. She expressed her thanks for the wonderful welcome and said it was a thrilling sight to see the retraining programs in automobile mechanics, secretarial work, and cosmetology in operation. ".,Ill these women in this group," she said, "felt that they wanted to go right in and be customers by the end of the day." The President then resumed speaking.]
We want to commend you again on the fine work that is going on in this great institution. We want to thank you for your hospitality. We want to tell you that we appreciate your friendship and the encouragement that you have always given us, the support we have had in Kentucky. We hope that sometime we can come back again. If you ever happen to be in the Nation's Capital, come over to your White House. We would like to see you.
Thank you very much.
Note: During his remarks the President referred to Governor Edward T. Breathitt, Jr., and Representative Carl D. Perkins of Kentucky, Under Secretary of Commerce Franklin D. Roosevelt, Jr., Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Anthony J. Celebrezze, and Senator John Sherman Cooper of Kentucky.