Lyndon B. Johnson
April 29, 1965

Statement by the President on the Meetings in Tokyo To Foster U.S.-Japanese Medical Cooperation.
I AM most pleased and gratified by the preliminary report I have received today from Dr. Colin MacLeod on the recent meetings in Tokyo to explore the joint U.S.-Japan undertaking to improve the health of the peoples of Asia.
I am especially grateful for the courtesies extended to our representatives and particularly for Prime Minister Sato's personal interest in meeting with Dr. MacLeod.
The peoples of Asia have endured for centuries the oppression of many diseases and illnesses. Today the stifling effects of ill health stand in the way of fulfillment for the progress toward a better life which we of the United States so much want the peoples of Asia to enjoy. In Japan as in the United States progress has been made for developing medical science and research which are bringing rising standards of health to the peoples of both lands. It is my hope--as I expressed to Prime Minister Sato during his visit to Washington in January--that we might pool our knowledge, talents, and resources to mount more successful attacks upon the diseases afflicting the lives of the people who live around the rim of the Pacific.
On the basis of the talks in Tokyo, I am confident that this joint effort will move forward effectively and successfully and will make a contribution of historic dimensions to the health of Asia. We are honored and privileged to be associated with Japan in this important humane endeavor.
Note: The first planning meeting of the U.S. Advisory Group on U.S.-Japanese cooperation in medical science with their Japanese counterparts was held in Tokyo, April 19-21. Dr. Colin M. MacLeod, Deputy Director, Office of Science and Technology, headed the American delegation. For an earlier statement of the President announcing the implementation of an agreement made in January 1965 with Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan for the convening of a conference on the medical science cooperation program, see Item 175