Lyndon B. Johnson
April 08, 1968

Proclamation 3845—Loyalty Day, 1968

Ten years ago, Congress set aside May 1st of every year as Loyalty Day—a time for all Americans to reaffirm their devotion to our national ideals.
This year Loyalty Day comes at a time when the most cherished beliefs of our Nation are being put to stern tests. It is a time when all of us should think deeply upon our principles, reaffirm their essential integrity, and bear witness to them in our lives.
We believe in freedom. So loyally let us act to make men free.
We believe in peace. So let us pursue it along every road of honor.
We believe in equality. So let us do what we must to assure it for all.
We believe in justice. So let us revere and uphold the law upon which justice rests.
Moreover, we believe these principles are compatible. Freedom need not be sacrificed for peace, nor equality sought at the expense of justice. Yet their achievement is not easy. It will come only if we are a people so united in our beliefs that we are not divided in our loyalties.
On Loyalty Day, 1968, every American should pause to look within himself and put a measure to the depths of his beliefs. Then let us act upon them, a free and united people, loyal as always to our heritage as Americans.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do call upon the people of the United States, and upon all patriotic, civic, and educational organizations, to observe Wednesday, May 1, 1968, as Loyalty Day, with appropriate ceremonies in which all of us may join in a reaffirmation of our loyalty to the United States of America.
I also call upon appropriate officials of the Government to display the flag of the United States on all Government buildings on that day as a manifestation of our loyalty to the Nation which that flag symbolizes.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand this eighth day of April, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-eight and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-second.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON