Lyndon B. Johnson
April 21, 1967

Message to the Congress Transmitting First Annual Report of the National Advisory Council on Extension and Continuing Education
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to transmit the First Annual Report of the National Advisory Council on Extension and Continuing Education.
As this Report points out, extension and continuing education--once the neglected stepchild in the American educational system--has now become a vital part of that system. Benefiting 25 million citizens each year, continuing education is helping to meet the needs of America's adult population. It recognizes that education is a continuing process that does not end when the student leaves the classroom.
The Federal role in supporting continuing education began more than a century ago. As our society evolved and became more complex, the Federal effort intensified. Today, through Federally-supported programs, we can cite these examples of progress:
--American adults, denied the opportunity to learn when they were young, are being taught to read and write.
--The poor and the unemployed, through special education and training, are being given a chance to stand on their own two feet.
--Scientists, engineers, doctors, dentists and teachers are improving their skills and keeping up with the latest technological advances.
--Employees at all levels of government are being trained to serve the public better.
These extensive efforts are complemented by our recent efforts under Title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 to bring colleges and universities into local communities to conduct seminars and other programs on issues of great concern. Under this program we are focusing the intellectual resources and research facilities of higher education on problems affecting the daily lives of every citizen--from health and housing to transportation and recreation.
In its first year alone, the program reached every State in the Nation, with 300 colleges and universities participating. In fiscal 1968, this number will almost double.
The attached Report of the National Advisory Council on Extension and Continuing Education details much of this progress and recommends a number of steps to strengthen continuing education in America.
After consultation with the Council, the Administration developed and submitted to the Congress legislation to improve our continuing education programs under Title I by:
--Extending the program for another five years.
--Enabling smaller colleges and universities to continue to participate.
--Providing additional funds for experimental projects.
I commend this Report to your attention.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

April 21, 1967
Note: The Council was established by Title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 89-329; 79 Stat. 1219).
Its report, transmitted to the President on March 31, 1967, is entitled "First Annual Report of the National Advisory Council on Extension and Continuing Education, Presented to the President of the United States and the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare" (21 pp., processed).