Lyndon B. Johnson
April 04, 1967

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Sunay of Turkey.
AT THE invitation of President Johnson and Mrs. Johnson, President Cevdet Sunay of the Republic of Turkey and Mrs. Sunay are paying a state visit to the United States.
The warm welcome and cordial hospitality extended to President Sunay and his party reflect the deep and traditional friendship between the peoples of Turkey and the United States. President Sunay expressed his sincere thanks to the Government and the people of the United States for the warm and friendly reception accorded him.
During the visit to Washington, April 3-5, the two Presidents, joined by Foreign Minister Caglayangil and Secretary Rusk, engaged in wide-ranging talks during which they reviewed the relations between the two countries and the important international problems affecting world peace and security.
The two Presidents recalled the history of Turkish-United States relations and recognized the substantial contributions made by Turkey to the free world. They also stressed the close association between the two countries which began with implementation of the Truman Doctrine in 1947.
Both Presidents found themselves in agreement that Turkey and the United States continue to share a community of interests in questions affecting the peace of the world, a devotion to democracy and freedom, a commitment to the principles of harmony and mutual respect among nations. It is on the basis of these common interests and principles that they reaffirmed the determination of their countries further to develop their relations based upon mutual respect, understanding, and trust.
One of the main subjects dealt with was the economic development of Turkey. President Sunay described the encouraging progress in this field and stressed the efforts of Turkey to achieve the objectives set forth in the five-year development plan. The two Presidents agreed that the consortium for aid to Turkey has provided an efficient multilateral mechanism for securing the foreign aid needed by Turkey, and that this cooperative endeavor should continue. President Johnson reaffirmed the United States determination to continue to support the development efforts of Turkey by maintaining at a significant level its economic assistance, the aim being to assist Turkey to reach its declared goal of vigorous, self-sustaining economic growth.
Both Presidents recognized the need of promoting cooperation in areas of science and technology for peaceful purposes. The two Presidents discussed the problems concerning the Atlantic Alliance. They welcomed the lessening of tension in Europe. They agreed, however, that the Atlantic Alliance remains an indispensable safeguard to peace and security in Europe and in the world. They reiterated the need to maintain the integrated military structure of NATO as the basis of an adequate defense and deterrent, and to reinforce the solidarity of the Alliance in the spirit of partnership. They noted with satisfaction that the arrangements for nuclear planning constitute a development reflecting allied solidarity and cooperation.
President Johnson, recognizing the vital role which Turkey plays within the NATO defense alliance, pledged the continuing assistance of the United States for the strengthening of Turkey's defense capabilities. Reviewing the situation in Europe, the two Presidents agreed that a stable peace requires the healing of the division of that continent. In this regard they also discussed the efforts which their Governments have been making to ease East-West tensions. They stressed the importance of improving East-West relations and of developing an atmosphere of mutual trust. They agreed that this development would contribute to peace.
The two Presidents reiterated the attachment of their countries to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and expressed the hope that the United Nations would become increasingly an effective instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security.
President Sunay and President Johnson stressed the need to work unceasingly towards complete and general disarmament under effective international controls. They stressed their concern over the dangers inherent in the spread of nuclear weapons and expressed the hope that a nonproliferation treaty would soon be completed in a way that would take fully into account the interests of all.
During their talks the two Presidents reviewed recent developments in Southeast Asia. President Johnson described the situation in Vietnam and the efforts of the United States Government to bring about a peaceful settlement. President Sunay expressed his appreciation for the reaffirmation by the United States Government of its desire for early negotiations. Both Presidents expressed regret that recent intensive efforts to find a way to a solution had not so far yielded any positive results. They found themselves in agreement on the need to support the right of the Vietnamese, both in the South and in the North, to determine their own future in peace.
President Johnson and President Sunay discussed also the problem of Cyprus in all its aspects. They reviewed the developments since the unhappy events of 1963, which caused so much distress and suffering on the island, especially to the Turkish community. They emphasized the need to refrain from any action likely to increase tension on the island and between interested parties. President Sunay invited the attention of President Johnson to the sufferings resulting from the present situation on the island. He reiterated Turkey's desire to arrive at a peaceful and agreed settlement. Referring to bilateral talks between Turkey and Greece, both Presidents expressed the hope that such talks would lead to an honorable solution reconciling the legitimate interests of all the parties concerned, including the communities living on the island. In their discussion, proceeding from the binding effects of existing treaties, both Presidents agreed that these remain an essential factor in seeking such a solution. The two Presidents expressed their appreciation of the task performed by the United Nations force in Cyprus and discussed ways in which the efforts of the United Nations to preserve peace and to secure a return to normal conditions can be strengthened.
The two Presidents expressed the conviction that their frank and cordial talks would further the bonds of friendship, alliance, and cooperation between Turkey and the United States.