Lyndon B. Johnson
April 08, 1965

Statement by the President: U.S.-Japanese Cooperation in Medical Science.
NO MATTER what other problems divide the nations of the world the peoples of the globe are joined together in a common struggle against suffering and disease. Americans have always stood ready to play our part in that struggle and to join the forces of our science and our medicine with those of others to try to control and prevent disease not only in our own country but in all parts of the world.
When Prime Minister Sato of Japan was here in January, we agreed that we will cooperate and join our resources and talents in an effort to solve some of the most serious medical problems that afflict our two countries as well as other countries of Asia. Today it is my privilege to announce here-concurrently with announcement being made by the Prime Minister following a meeting of the Japanese Cabinet--that we are going ahead to implement that agreement.
An American team headed by one of our distinguished medical scientists, Dr. Colin MacLeod, Deputy Director of the Office of Science and Technology and including some of our most able medical experts, will leave soon for Tokyo to begin discussions on April 19 with their Japanese counterparts. The purpose will be to seek ways and means by which our two countries can work with each other and with the other nations of Asia to speed our progress in overcoming diseases which are of importance to our own two countries as well as many others in the Pacific area.
They will map out modes of attack against diseases such as malaria, cholera, schistosomiasis, tuberculosis, virus diseases, heart disease, and cancer, and will discuss further cooperative efforts on problems of air pollution and pesticides.
After this planning conference, we hope to discuss with the countries concerned ways in which the cooperation can be of benefit to other Asian nations.
Our goal is a peaceful world and a better world. We seek a better, fuller, and healthier life not only for all Americans but for all mankind. We can reach that goal if the nations which have talents and resources join hands with each other and those in need of assistance to face common problems together.
We can make progress by giving attention to those concerns which unite us while at the same time trying earnestly and unceasingly to solve the questions which divide us. The health of mankind is a problem of the deepest common concern. The cooperation between Japan and the United States and other interested nations of Asia is a significant and hopeful step toward these goals.
It is my hope that the works and results of this program may long commemorate the friendly meeting here in the United States with Prime Minister Sato.
Note: For the January agreement of the President and Prime Minister Sato, see Item 15.
A list of the names of the 8-member U.S. advisory group on U.S.-Japanese cooperation in medical science, with Dr. Colin MacLeod designated chairman, was released with the President's statement. The group's first planning meeting with their Japanese counterparts was held April 19-21 in Tokyo.