Lyndon B. Johnson
April 20, 1967

Executive Order 11348—Providing for the Further Training of Government Employees
By virtue of the authority vested in me by section 301 of Title 3 of the United States Code and by section 2 of the Act of July 7, 1958 (72 Stat. 327), it is ordered as follows:
PART I—GENERAL
SECTION 101. (a) As used in this order, the terms "agency", "employee", "Government", and "training" have the meanings given to those terms, respectively, by section 4101 of Title 5, United States Code.
(b) "Interagency training" means training provided by one agency for other agencies or shared by two or more agencies.
SEC. 102. It is the policy of the Government of the United States to develop its employees through the establishment and operation of progressive and efficient training programs, thereby improving public service, increasing efficiency and economy, building and retaining a force of skilled and efficient employees, and installing and using the best modern practices and techniques in the conduct of the Government's business.
SEC. 103. The Civil Service Commission shall provide leadership and guidance to insure that the policy set forth in section 102 is carried out.
PART II—CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION RESPONSIBILITIES
SEC. 201. The Civil Service Commission shall plan and promote the development, improvement, coordination, and evaluation of training in accordance with chapter 41 of Title 5, United States Code, and with the policy set forth in section 102 of this order.
SEC. 202. In carrying out its responsibilities under chapter 41 of Title 5, United States Code, and section 201 of this order, the Commission shall:
(a) Advise the President on means for furthering and strengthening programs of training;
(b) Counsel heads of agencies and other agency officials on the improvement of training;
(c) Assist agencies to develop sound programs and financial plans for training and provide advice, information, and assistance to agencies on planning, programming, budgeting, operating, and evaluating training programs;
(d) Identify functional areas in which new or expanded interagency training activity is needed and either conduct such training or arrange for agencies having the substantive competence to do so;
(e) Coordinate interagency training conducted by and for agencies (including agencies and portions of agencies excepted by section 4102(a) of Title 5, United States Code);
(f) Encourage agencies to make appropriate use of non-Government training resources;
(g) Develop, install, and maintain a system to provide the training data needed to carry out its own functions and to provide staff assistance to the President; and
(h) Provide for identification and dissemination of findings of research into training technology and undertake, or assign to other agencies, such research projects as may be needed.
PART III—AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES AND OPERATIONS
SEC. 301. The head of each agency shall plan, program, budget, operate, and evaluate training programs in accordance with chapter 41 of Title 5, United States Code, and with the policy set forth in section 102 of this order.
SEC. 302. The head of each agency shall:
(a) Foster employee self-development by creating a work environment in which self-development is encouraged, by assuring that opportunities for training and self-study materials are reasonably available where the employee is stationed, and by recognizing self-initiated improvement in performance;
(b) Provide training for employees without regard to race, creed, color, national origin, sex, or other factors unrelated to the need for training;
(c) Establish and make full use of agency facilities for training employees;
(d) Extend agency training programs to employees of other agencies (including agencies and portions of agencies excepted by section 4102(a) of Title 5, United States Code) and assign his employees to interagency training whenever this will result in better training, improved service, or savings to the Government;
(e) Establish interagency training facilities in areas of substantive competence as arranged by the Civil Service Commission; and
(f) Use non-Government training resources as appropriate.
SEC. 303. In carrying out his responsibilities, the head of each agency shall, consonant with chapter 41 of Title 5, United States Code, this order, and regulations of the Civil Service Commission:
(a) Review periodically, but not less often than annually, the agency's program to identify training needed to bring about more effective performance at the least possible cost;
(b) Conduct periodic reviews of individual employee's training needs as related to program objectives;
(c) Conduct research related to training objectives and required for program improvement and effectiveness;
(d) Plan, program, and evaluate training for both short and long-range program needs by occupations,. organizations, or other appropriate groups;
(e) Establish priorities for needed training, and provide for the use of funds and manhours in accordance with these priorities;
(f) Utilize the flexibility of work assignments to provide work experience which promotes growth leading to higher quality and greater quantity of work done;
(g) Establish training facilities and services as needed;
(h) Monitor the effectiveness with which self-development is encouraged and on-the-job training is provided at all levels;
(i) Establish criteria for the selection of employees for training; and
(j) Approve the acceptance of any contributions, awards, or payments to employees authorized by section 401 (b) of this order and regulations issued by the Civil Service Commission.
PART IV—DELEGATIONS
SEC. 401. The following functions vested in the President are hereby delegated to the Civil Service Commission:
(a) The authority under section 4102(b) (1) of Title 5, United States Code, to designate any agency or part thereof, or any employee or employees therein, as excepted from any provision of chapter 41 of Title 5, United States Code, other than sections 4102, 4111 (b), and 4112; and to designate any such agency or part thereof, or any employee or employees therein previously excepted, as again subject to chapter 41 of Title 5, United States Code, or any provision of that chapter.
(b) The authority under section 4111(a) of Title 5, United States Code, to fix by regulation the extent to which the contributions, awards, and payments referred to in that section may be made to and accepted by employees.
SEC. 402. The authority vested in the President by section 4101(6) (B) of Title 5, United States Code, to designate a foreign government or international organization or instrumentality of either as eligible to provide training, is hereby delegated to the head of each agency for his employees except that each such designation shall be made only after the agency head concerned has obtained and given due consideration to the advice of the Department of State thereon prior to the first use of such training facility and thereafter periodically but not less often than once every three years.
PART V—REVOCATION OF PRIOR ORDER
SEC. 501. Executive Order No. 10800 of January 15, 1959, is hereby revoked.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House
April 20, 1967
NOTE: For the President's statement upon signing the Executive order, see the preceding item.