Lyndon B. Johnson
August 13, 1965

Proclamation 3667—Smithson Bicentennial Celebration

James Smithson of London, England, on June 27, 1829, bequeathed his estate to the United States of America "to found at Washington, under the name of the Smithsonian Institution, an establishment for the increase and diffusion of knowledge among men." By subsequent acts of Congress, the United States received Smithson's property and accepted his trust. In faithful execution of this trust, by Act of Congress approved on August 10, 1846, the President, the Vice President, the Chief Justice, and the heads of the executive departments were "constituted, an 'establishment,' by the name of the 'Smithsonian Institution,' for the increase and diffusion of knowledge among men."
The direction of the affairs of the Institution was entrusted to a Board of Regents comprised of the Chief Justice, the Vice President, three Senators and three Representatives, and six other distinguished citizens of the United States. The Smithsonian Institution, in carrying out its mandate, has striven to serve as the cutting edge of original research in advancing the frontiers of knowledge beyond the limits of the practical, profitable, and obvious. In pursuing knowledge to its outer limits, it has willingly relinquished to others the task of applying the results of its original research in various fields. Thus, the former U.S. Weather Bureau and the Fish and Wildlife Service, among other organizations, were derived from programs first undertaken by the Smithsonian Institution.
It is particularly noteworthy that James Smithson, in setting forth the ideal of the "increase and diffusion of / knowledge among men" as the mission of this organization, ignored considerations of nationality, private interest, and narrow scholarly specialization. Through the agency of the Institution and its bureaus (such as the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the International Exchange Service), Smithson's universal ideal has been carried around the world, raising scholarly standards abroad and at home by the fruitful interchange of ideas and knowledge. Furthermore, Anglo-American friendship has been promoted in the past by acts such as Smithson's bequest and will be served in the future by reciprocal acts of disinterested encouragement to scholarship.
Ideals of justice as well as knowledge are served by honoring those men of any country and any time who seek to further the cause of man himself, and any institution dedicated to such ideals must constantly rededicate itself to them. In rededication to Smithson's ideal, and on the anniversary of the bicentennial of his birth, the Board of Regents and the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution have invited prominent scholars, scientists, and representatives of universities, museums, and learned societies to Washington for a program of addresses, papers and discussions concerning the broad problems of man and his relationship to his environment. The Congress, by a joint resolution approved August 13, 1965, has called upon the President to issue a proclamation in commemoration of this historic event.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, and presiding officer of the Smithsonian Institution, hereby proclaim the occasion of the bicentennial celebration of the birth of James Smithson; and I designate and set aside September 17 and 18, 1965, as special days to honor the memory of James Smithson and the accomplishments of the Institution that bears his name.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this thirteenth day of August in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-five, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninetieth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
DEAN RUSK

Secretary of State