Lyndon B. Johnson
August 02, 1968

Remarks to Reporters After a Visit With President Eisenhower at Walter Reed Army Medical Center
THE PRESIDENT [Replying to a question on the health of President Eisenhower]. I found him fine. He looked wonderful. He was very relaxed. We spent, oh, I suppose three-quarters of an hour talking about our experiences, our problems, and the affairs of the Nation.

There are few men in this country of ours who have had more experience, whom I enjoy listening to and exchanging views with more than General Eisenhower.
Q. Sir, did you talk about the steel dispute?
THE PRESIDENT. I don't want to get into specifics, but we discussed generally our relations with other nations, the domestic problems, the steel situation, and all the matters that affect this country. We did not take up any specific subject, and I did not come to tire him or to try to go into any detail on any governmental matters.
I came to express my deep interest in him, my great respect for him, and to receive the benefit of any comments he had to make. I always feel stronger after having been in his presence. I am very happy that he is looking as well as he is, and I think it is just a matter of days until he will be out among us. He seemed chipper and relaxed, and I was very happy with what I saw.
Q. What is the situation now on the steel price situation, Mr. President?
THE PRESIDENT. Not much that I can add to what we said yesterday. We have sent wires to the companies and to the men responsible for guiding the destinies of those companies, and tried to explain to them how important their decision is to the Nation in this critical period. We hope that they will be considerate of the national interest.
Q. Do you see the need for any additional action, sir, on steel at this time?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we are keeping it constantly under study, and I am sure there will be additional action.
Q. Thank you very much, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT. I might say we will go from here to the airport, and we will be in Texas for the next few days, perhaps for the next few weeks, doing a good deal of our work from the house down there.

Reporter: Thank you, sir.
Note: The President spoke at 12:55 p.m. at the Waiter Reed General Hospital in Washington. For action on the steel situation, see Item 427.