Lyndon B. Johnson
August 26, 1965

Statement by the President Upon Announcing a Program of Assistance to Los Angeles.
WE HAVE all felt a deep sense of shock and dismay at the riots last week in Los Angeles. I have expressed my conviction that there is no greater wrong in our democracy than violent or willful disregard of law.
At the same time, we cannot let the actions of three or four thousand rioters stay our compassion for the hundreds of thousands of people in the city of Los Angeles--of every race and color--who neither participated in nor condoned the riots. Many suffered at the hands of the rioters. Many are in need of help.
We must eliminate the deep-seated causes of riots such as those we witnessed. Recent studies paint a stark picture. The Watts district is in the center of an area in Los Angeles marked by:
--the largest number of school dropouts.
--the highest crime rate.
--the highest population density.
--the lowest median family income.
There are complex problems and the solutions are neither quick nor easy. Long-term answers must and will be found. The White House Conference on Civil Rights this fall should help us. The work of Governor Brown's special commission should help us.
But now is a time for immediate action.
There are men and women without work.
There are children without homes.
There are hundreds upon hundreds of school dropouts.
There are citizens whose businesses have been destroyed and must be rebuilt.
I am today sending a team of Federal officials under the leadership of Ramsey Clark, the Deputy Attorney General, as my personal representative to Los Angeles to develop with Governor Brown, Mayor Yorty, and other officials a combined program to restore and rehabilitate the damaged areas of Los Angeles. This program will be aimed at helping those citizens affected by the riots to help themselves. In short, the team's charter is to make available the best programs now known to wipe out the causes of such violent outbursts.

Among the matters to be considered are:
1. A special employment program with emphasis on work in the devastated areas.
2. Steppe-up youth training programs.
3. Establishment of pilot child care centers, to provide care for parentless children and to give needy mothers training and employment opportunities.
4. Establishment of a small business development center to aid business in the area.
5. Increased health and medical service-emphasizing the children.
6. A vigorous back-to-school program.
7. An expanded surplus food distribution program.
8. An expedited program for placing surplus property such as clothing, medical equipment, and mobile buildings in these stricken areas.
9. Setting up more neighborhood facilities.
In. Accelerating planning and construction of low-income housing.
Mr. Clark will be accompanied by Jack Conway, Deputy Director of the war against poverty, and Andrew Brimmer, Assistant Secretary of Commerce. Other Federal agencies, including the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Housing and Home Finance Agency, and the Small Business Administration, will be represented on the team.
Note: In his statement the President referred to, among others, Governor Edmund G. Brown of California, Mayor Samuel W. Yorty of Los Angeles, and Jack T. Conway, Deputy Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity.
On September 2, 1965, the White House announced that the President had received an interim progress report from Mr. Clark. The announcement stated that, based on the recommendations in the report, the President had ordered approximately 45 individual and community self-help projects to be expedited in order to assist all sections of Los Angeles in need of help (1 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 192).
See also Item 426.