Lyndon B. Johnson
August 24, 1966

Statement by the President on Announcing the Members of the Presidential Task Force on Career Advancement.
AT THE Woodrow Wilson School for Public and International Affairs at Princeton on May 11, 1966, I announced that Chairman John Macy of the Civil Service Commission would head a Task Force to survey Federal programs for career advancement. I also announced that the Task Force would "study an expanded program of graduate training which, with the help of the universities, can enlarge our efforts to develop the talents and broaden the horizons of our career officers."
I am pleased that the Task Force on Career Advancement is ready to begin its work. The central purpose of the Task Force will be to make recommendations to me concerning the better uses of education and training, both in the service and in outside educational institutions, toward the advancement and improved performance of our managerial, professional, and technical work force.
The primary objective is the elevation of the performance and perspectives of our careerists so that they may more efficiently and effectively serve the public.
I expect the Task Force to study and compare recent advances in industry, in the universities, and in other governments with progress in training and education in the Federal Government so that we may apply the best of modern methods for the development of our work force. Changing technology and new knowledge require new methods of learning; new public problems demand creative and innovative approaches. In the Federal Government we need to exploit to the maximum the best methods for learning and for renewal.
Toward these ends, the Task Force will be expected to furnish a set of recommendations which will enable me to take action directed toward the establishment of a training and education program in the Federal Service responsive to the critical needs of our times.
Note: A listing of the members of the Presidential Task Force on Career Advancement, released with the statement, follows: John W. Macy, Jr., Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, John W. Gardner, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, Charles L. Schultze, Director, Bureau of the Budget, McGeorge Bundy, President of the Ford Foundation, Dr. Evron Kirkpatrick, Executive Director of the American Political Science Association, Dr. Robert D. Calkins, President of the Brookings Institution, Dr. Jerome H. Holland, President of the Hampton Institute, Dr. James H. McCrocklin, Southwest Texas State College, San Marcos, Texas, Andrew Biemiller, Director of Legislation, AFL-CIO, Dr. Marver H. Berkeley, Corporate Personnel Director, Texas Instruments, Inc., and Lawrence Binger, Manager, Personnel Services, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co.
The Task Force transmitted several reports to the President early in 1967. They are entitled "Investment for Tomorrow; A Report of the Presidential Task Force on Career Advancement" (Government Printing Office, 1967, 69 pp.), and "Self and Service Enrichment Through Federal Training" (Government Printing Office, 1967, 577 PP.).
For the President's remarks at the Woodrow Wilson School for Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, see item 216.