Lyndon B. Johnson
August 15, 1967

Remarks of the President and Chancellor Kiesinger Reporting to the Press on Their Meeting.
THE PRESIDENT. Ladies and gentlemen, the Chancellor and I met alone, except for the presence of interpreters, for about 2 hours.
We discussed the problems that confront our two nations, and we again expressed the strong friendship of our people for the people of Germany.
We reviewed the questions that are familiar to all of you--the strength of the alliance.
We both agreed that we wanted to see that that strength remained unimpaired.
We discussed the deployment of troops and the strength of the commitments of each of our nations. We are both very anxious to maintain those strengths.
We discussed the indications that there would be substantial reductions on the part of Germany, what problems we would have in this country in that regard, and the suggestion that there be reductions here.
No decisions have been made on the part of the German nation, and none have been made here.
We agreed that we would consult fully with each other and with our NATO allies before making any decisions that would alter those strengths, and we would try to come into agreement before any action was taken.
We talked about the nonproliferation treaty that has been the subject of such concern throughout the world for some time. We discussed the relative economic conditions in our two countries.
We talked about the problems that both leaders face at home and abroad. And I think we had a very constructive, very friendly, and a very productive meeting.
I look forward to every minute that I can spend with the Chancellor and his party.
Secretary Rusk and Mr. Brandt, the Vice Chancellor, were off together talking for some time. In addition to that, the respective members of our staffs met in the Cabinet Room and exchanged viewpoints during the time the Chancellor was in my office.
We have been looking forward to the Chancellor and Mrs. Kiesinger's visit here for some time since we were privileged to be in their home in Bonn. Now that that day has come, we are going to fully enjoy it.
We hope to make it a productive week for both countries.
Mr. Chancellor, we would be glad to have you make any observations.
THE CHANCELLOR. I fully confirm what the President stated about our discussions. We tried to get a clear picture of the situation of our two countries and nations.
I have read in the American papers that I am the sort of a Chancellor who does want to make an independent policy. I want it very strongly indeed. But independence doesn't mean that we leave the path of close cooperation and friendship with the United States.
Despite many rumors, this government is firmly decided to preserve and strengthen NATO, not only the alliance, but the military integrated system of NATO.
We are convinced that for a foreseeable time we have to stick together. We have to try in common to preserve freedom and peace. Maintaining big armies does not mean that we do not want to have detente and peace.
We have, on our side, decided to help whatever we can, to beware and safeguard peace.
I explained to the President our policy in Europe, our 'policy towards our Western neighbors, towards France, towards Great Britain, and others.
I tried to explain to him our policy towards our Eastern neighbors, where we are trying to overcome by and by the old ideological and political antagonisms and where we are trying to establish better relations with our Eastern neighbors.
At the same time, of course, we have to try not to lose sight of the German question, the great problem, how we can solve this problem, how we will be able to reunify our people. That process must go hand in hand with this process of detente we are trying to follow in Europe.
Mr. President, I am looking forward to our further discussions. I am quite convinced that this visit will be very, very fruitful for our two nations and will strengthen the bonds of friendship and cooperation between us and our countries.
Note: The meeting with reporters was held at 2:32 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House.