Lyndon B. Johnson
August 25, 1966

Letter to the Parents of Five Sons Currently on Active Duty in the Marine Corps.
[Released August 25, 1966. Dated August 22, 1966]
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Hoffman:
I learned only recently that yours is the only family with five sons currently on active duty in any of the military services, an experience unprecedented in the United States Marine Corps.

I am deeply impressed by this record. As you may know, each day I receive reports which indicate the bravery of our servicemen and which make me realize even more the magnitude of our debt to them.
This certainly applies to your fine sons who individually and collectively have demonstrated the highest degree of loyalty and dedication.

But just as I am proud of them, I also want to commend you for imparting to them a deep sense of patriotism and a full understanding of the responsibilities of citizenship.
As long as we have families such as the Hoffmans, I have not the slightest doubt that the liberty this nation has enjoyed for almost two hundred years will continue to be a birthright for future generations of Americans.
I wish you would express to each of your sons my appreciation, as well as that of the entire country, for the contributions they are making to the cause of free men everywhere.

Mrs. Johnson joins me in extending best wishes to all of the members of your courageous and devoted family.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Mr. and Mrs. Henry J. Hoffman, 92 Bingham Ave., Rumson, N.J.]
Note: The text of the letter was posted on the bulletin board in the Press Room at the White House. It was not made public in the form of a White House press release.
Names, ranks, and units of the five Hoffman brothers at the time of preparation of this volume, were as follows: 1st. Lt. George J. Hoffman, 2d Marine Aircraft Wing, Cherry Point, N.C.; S/Sgt. Henry Hoffman, Headquarters, Marine Corps, Arlington, Va.; Sgt. Walter Hoffman, released from active duty; Cpl. Robert T. Hoffman, 9th Marine Amphibious Brigade, Fleet Marine Force, Pacific; L/Cpl. Richard Hoffman, West Pacific Command, Fleet Marine Force, Pacific.