Lyndon B. Johnson
August 21, 1966

Remarks at Franklin D. Roosevelt's Summer Cottage, Campobello Island, New Brunswick.
Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Pearson, Senator Macnaughton, Senator and Mrs. Muskie, distinguished guests on the platform, ladies and gentlemen:
I am very proud to be on this historic island with the distinguished Prime Minister of our neighbor and our dose friend, Canada.
If Campobello had not been located between our two nations, I think President Roosevelt would have moved it here. He had a reverence for the island just as he had a deep affection, Mr. Prime Minister, for your country and for your people.
When I first came to Washington 35 years ago, President Franklin Roosevelt was only a few months away from the Presidency.
Before his death 14 years later, he was to help change forever America's course in the affairs of the world. And he was to leave on a very young Congressman an enduring awareness of both the limits as well as the obligations of power.
I saw President Roosevelt on occasion during those years of intense debate over America's response to aggression in Asia and Europe. I saw his concern grow as one test after another gave the belligerent powers increasing confidence that they could get away with aggression.
And here, at Campobello--where the memory of Franklin Roosevelt is strong--I am reminded today of how those years have shaped the realities of our own time.

First, we know that our alternatives are sometimes determined more by what others do than by our own desires.
We do not choose to use force, but aggression narrows the alternatives--either we do nothing and let aggression succeed, or we take our stand to resist it.
We would always choose peace, but when other men choose peace at the expense of someone else's freedom, the alternative is unacceptable.
Second, we know that a great power can influence events just as much by withdrawing its power as it can by using its power.
Third, we have learned that unrest and instability in one part of the world are a real danger to other areas in the world and to other peoples who live in those areas. If hostilities in strategic areas can be contained, they will be less likely to threaten world peace with a confrontation of nations that possess unlimited power.
Fourth, we know that if a safe world order depends as much on a large power's word and its will as it does on weapons, for the world to be secure our friends must trust our treaties and our adversaries must respect our resolve.
Fifth, we know that power carries with it a mandate for restraint and patience: restraint because nuclear weapons have raised the stakes of unmeasured force; and patience, because we are concerned with more than just tomorrow.
No man loved peace more than Franklin D. Roosevelt. It was in the marrow of his soul and I never saw him more grieved than when reports came from the War Department of American casualties in a major battle.
But he led my Nation and he led it courageously in conflict--not for war's sake, because he knew that beyond war lay the larger hopes of man.
And so it is today. The history of mankind is the history of conflict and agony-of wars and of rumors of wars. Still today, we must contend with the cruel reality that some men still believe in using force and seek by aggression to impose their will on others. And that is not the kind of world that America wants, but it is the kind of world that we have.
The day is coming when those men will realize that aggression against their neighbors does not pay. It will be hastened if every nation that abhors war will apply all the influence at their command to persuade the aggressors from their chosen course.
For this is the real limit of power: We have the means of unlimited destruction, but we do not have the power alone to make peace in the world. Only when those who promote aggression will agree to come and reason together will the world finally know, again, the blessings of peace. That day, I do not doubt, will come, and once men realize that aggression really bears no rewards, it may be that the deepest hopes of Franklin Roosevelt--hopes for a genuine peace and an end to war of every kind--will finally be realized.
So it is good to be here with a man to whom peace has been a lifelong pursuit. American Presidents and Canadian Prime Ministers have always had a very dose and informal arrangement reflecting the ties that bind our two countries together.
On this occasion, may we all remember the courage and the strength of a man whose name grows even larger with each passing year: Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Note: The President spoke at 3:35 p.m., following discussions with Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson of Canada, at the laying of the cornerstone for the visitors' center at the Roosevelt-Campobello International Park. In his opening words the President referred to Prime Minister and Mrs. Pearson, Alan Aylesworth Macnaughton, Member of the Canadian Senate from the Province of Quebec, and Senator and Mrs. Edmund S. Muskie of Maine.