Lyndon B. Johnson
August 15, 1968

Statement by the President Upon Signing Order Providing for State and Local Participation in Federal Manpower Programs.
TODAY we seek to enrich the lives of almost 26 million Americans who are still trapped in poverty in the richest nation ever known to man.
For the children of poverty, there is the hope that full educational opportunity will lead them toward a brighter tomorrow. For the adults, the greatest hope lies in manpower programs.
We know that the answer to eliminating poverty, and the despair and misery it breeds, lies where the problems are and where the people are.

The answer lies in Mainstreet America, in our decaying inner cities, in our rural areas-wherever idle citizens are found.
Today, I signed an Executive order designed to stimulate far greater local and State participation in formulating manpower activities to meet the special needs of local communities.
This effort, operating under the Cooperative Area Manpower Planning System (CAMPS), stresses the importance of State and local initiative and local knowledge in meeting local manpower needs.
Only through the close cooperation of every segment of our society--public and private--will we be able to mount the kind of comprehensive attack required to help all become productive.

By more effectively linking Federal manpower activities with resources at State and local levels, we will better be able to deliver all those services needed to equip the unemployed for today's jobs.
This is the overriding purpose of my action today.
Note: The President referred to Executive Order 11422 "Cooperative Area Manpower Planning System" (4 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 1232; 33 F.R. 11739; 3 CFR, 1968 Comp. p. 128).
A White House release of the same day, describing the new system, stated that CAMPS was organized in 1967 to consolidate manpower activities of eight Federal agencies in an effort to solve manpower problems at the community level. In fiscal 1969, the release added, CAMPS would plan and execute programs serving 1.3 million persons at a Federal investment of $2.1 billion (4 Weekly Comp. Pros. Docs., p. 1232).
The statement was released at Austin, Texas.