Lyndon B. Johnson
August 30, 1965

Statement by the President on the Role of the National Export Expansion Council.
I HAVE asked former Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges to meet with key officials of the Department of Commerce tomorrow to map plans for a renewed effort to increase the sale of U.S. goods abroad.
The National Export Expansion Council is being enlarged and revitalized with the assistance of Governor Hodges and Fred C. Foy, chief executive officer of the Koppers Company of Pittsburgh, Pa., who will serve as chairman, and Robert F. Dwyer, a Portland, Oreg., lumber executive, vice chairman.
Despite the long dock strike during the early part of this year, exports in the first 6 months were running at an annual rate of $24.8 billion--nearly $200 million greater than exports for the same period in 1964. However, with imports rising at a much faster pace in the first half of the year-climbing 13 percent--to an annual rate of $20.3 billion, the need for intensifying the Nation's export expansion effort is evident.
The contribution which the National Export Expansion Council and its 42 regional councils have already made is reflected in the sharp growth in U.S. exports in the past 4 years--growing from $19.6 billion in 1960 to $25.6 billion last year--an increase of 31 percent. In the past 3 years the 1,200 business and professional leaders volunteering their services through these councils have also played a large role in our helping some 4,000 American companies become exporters for the first time.
Increasing numbers of American companies are taking a look at trade opportunities in the world market as a result of the administration's program. Through the voluntary efforts of the Council and the work of this department:
(1) officials of 10,000 companies were contacted;
(2) more than 1,200 seminars on selling abroad were organized throughout the country;
(3) numerous trade missions were sent to distant lands; and
(4) the Government moved to eliminate trade barriers and other obstacles to our foreign commerce.
In strengthening the National Export Expansion Council we have asked the chairmen of the 42 regional councils to serve on the national body so local problems affecting the growth of U.S. exports can be more effectively presented in Washington. The Council, which is being expanded from 33 to 66 members, will also include 11 prominent business and professional leaders and the heads of 10 national associations.