Lyndon B. Johnson
August 19, 1966

Statement by the President on the Continuing Water Crisis in the Northeastern States.
A YEAR AGO the Northeastern United States was threatened with disaster as a result of 4 years of unprecedented drought. To map out a plan of action, I met with the Governors and mayors concerned. We laid out a five-point plan.
First, I took action to declare as a drought disaster area the portions of New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Delaware within the Delaware River Basin and its service area.
Second, I authorized emergency action to meet the critical water crisis in northern New Jersey.
Third, we reached agreement on a "strategic water bank" for reserve use of New York or Philadelphia, as determined by the Delaware River Basin Commission.
Fourth, provision was made for speeding up construction of the Philadelphia-Torresdale water intake.
Finally, and in many ways more important, the Governors and the mayors of the drought-stricken areas increased their efforts to conserve their existing water supplies.
In addition, Federal agencies have provided continuing assistance to both urban and rural drought-stricken communities.
The drought has continued. June and July of this year have been especially hot and dry. The drought region now extends along the east coast from New England to Virginia and into West Virginia and Tennessee. The Potomac River at Washington reached record low flows early in August.
Even so, the amount of water stored in reservoirs in the drought region is substantially above that at the end of July 1965. This improvement is due in part to higher runoff during the past winter and spring. However, major credit must be given to better management, widespread conservation measures, and positive actions at all levels of government.
General rains in the last few days averaging about 1 inch over the drought area offer hope for eventual alleviation of the drought situation. But it will take a prolonged period of above normal rainfall to overcome the accumulated effects of 5 years of drought. We must continue our management and conservation measures and stand ready to take immediate action if the drought should become worse.
Therefore, I am extending to March 15, 1967, the drought disaster declaration for certain portions of New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Delaware.
I am asking all Federal agencies, the States, cities, and the Delaware River Basin Commission to continue their careful water management and conservation programs until the drought-relieving effects of next winter's snows can be predicted.
I am asking the Water Resources Council to continue its surveillance of the drought and in consultation with the affected States to recommend any further emergency action that may be necessary.
Note: The President met with the Governors and mayors affected by the water crisis in the Northeastern States on August 11 and again on August 18, 1965 (see 1965 volume, this series, Book II, Items 418, 434). The original drought disaster declaration, announced at the second of these meetings, expired on August 18, 1966.
The President's statement was released in Buffalo, N.Y., where he was beginning a 3-day trip to New York and New England.