Lyndon B. Johnson
December 23, 1967

Remarks to Senior Unit Commanders, Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam.
Gentlemen:
I don't want to take too much of your time. I came here this morning to tell you what your families and your loved ones would like to tell you; that is, we want you home for Christmas. We wish you could be there.
We are very proud that you are doing the job that you are doing. We know that no military force is any better than the man at the top. Everybody in our country, and the world, has great respect and confidence in General Westmoreland. He has assembled here this morning the men that make him what he is--the men who support him and the men who give him the substance and sustenance that permit him to do the job that he does. We are so very proud of you.
The leadership you have given has been unequaled. General Westmoreland tells me that the men whom you have produced and the men whom you lead have never been excelled. That, in itself, ought to give you great satisfaction.
Your cause is just. Your objective is peace. The day is not far away when you will succeed. I wish I had things in as good shape at home as you have them here.
All I can say is, we have set our course. We are not going to yield. We are not going to shimmy. We are going to wind up with a peace with honor which all Americans seek. Then we will come home and spend a happy Christmas again with our loved ones.
My wish is that you could be with us. Your Commander in Chief is very, very proud of you. I wish I could personally show you that admiration and that affection I feel for the gallant men who lead the best military force ever put on the battlefield.
But please know that we are with you. We are for you. We will be there until the end.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 9:18 a.m. at Cam Ranh Bay, Republic of Vietnam. During his remarks he referred to Gen. William C. Westmoreland, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam.
As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.