Lyndon B. Johnson
December 09, 1965

Statement by the President on the Members of the Advisory Committee on Older Americans.
THE NEW Committee represents a wide range of knowledge about the Nation's older people--their needs, their hopes, their abilities. The extensive and varied experiences of the members selected by Secretary Gardner will be invaluable in the pioneering work that lies ahead to make life better for our older citizens.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House release announcing the appointment by Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare John W. Gardner of the Advisory Committee on Older Americans, established by the Older Americans Act of 1965 (Public Law 89-73; 79 Stat. 218). The release stated that the Committee would advise Secretary Gardner on national policies and programs to improve the status and well-being of older people.
William D. Bechill, Commissioner on Aging, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, was appointed Chairman of the Committee. The names of the public members follow: William C. Fitch, Executive Director, American Association of Retired Persons and National Retired Teachers Association, Washington, D.C.; Rubin M. Hanan, Alabama League of Aging Citizens, Inc., Montgomery, Ala.; Garson Meyer, President, National Council on the Aging, Rochester, N.Y.; Mrs. A. M. G. Russell, Chairman, Citizens Advisory Committee on Aging, Atherton, Calif.; Mrs. Margaret Schweinhaut, Chairman, Maryland Coordinating Commission on Problems of the Aging, Baltimore, Md.; James F. McMichael, Executive Director, State Commission on Aging, Madison, Wis.; Dr. Edward T. Ximenes, general practitioner, San Antonio, Tex.; Dr. I. P. Davis, dentist and community leader, Miami, Fla.; Dr. Harold Sheppard, staff social scientist, W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Washington, D.C.; Zalmen Lichtenstein, Executive Director, Golden Ring Council of Senior Citizens, New York, N.Y.; Dr. Arnold M. Rose, Professor of Sociology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minn.; Jay Roney, Director, Project on Aging, American Public Welfare Association, former Director, Bureau of Family Services, Social Security Administration, Chicago, Ill.; Dr. Wilma Donahue, Chairman, Division of Gerontology, Institute for Human Adjustment, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.; Charles E. Odell, Director, Older and Retired Workers Department, United Auto Workers, Detroit, Mich.; and James C. O'Brien, Executive Director, United Steelworkers Committee on Older and Retired Workers, United Steelworker, Washington, D.C.