Lyndon B. Johnson
December 13, 1963

Exchange of Messages With Prime Minister Aldo Moro of Italy.
[ Released December 13, 1963; Dated December 9, 1963 ]
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
I send heartiest congratulations to you as you assume the great office of President of the Council of Ministers and I am happy that this message can be one of the early acts of my Administration. The relationship between Italy and the United States has been warm and close for many years. President Kennedy added to this friendship. I intend to continue on this course and do all I can to ensure that the relationship will become even stronger and closer during your and my period of responsibility. We are partners in the North Atlantic Alliance, and our political, economic and military cooperation is of central importance to freedom.
We take office at almost the same time, and both of us will be very busy during these early days. I hope nevertheless that we will have an opportunity to meet before too long and to discuss the many matters of concern to our two countries.
I wish you and your government every success in the tasks that lie ahead of you.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[His Excellency Aldo Moro, President of the Council of Ministers of the Italian Republic, Rome]
Note: Prime Minister Moro's reply, dated December 11, 1963, follows:
Mr. President:
I have just received your cordial message conveying your greetings and good wishes, and I, too, am happy it was among the first to reach me after I took office.
It is the intention of the Government that I preside upon as well as my own to give all possible contribution to a steady strengthening of the friendship and cooperation existing between our two countries. I am, therefore, especially happy to learn that you wish to continue along the path, already indicated by President Kennedy, that leads to a close cooperation within the framework of the Atlantic Alliance for the defense of freedom and peace.
I envisage with great satisfaction the possibility of meeting you in a not too distant future in order to examine issues of common interest.
In thanking you for your good wishes, which I wholeheartedly reciprocate for the work you are about to carry out, I extend to you my most cordial greetings.
ALDO MORO