Lyndon B. Johnson
December 01, 1966

Proclamation 3757—Wright Brothers Day, 1966

On December 17, 1903, two American brothers, Orville and Wilbur Wright, established a milestone in the history of man.
On that day, in a plane they had invented and constructed, they made the world's first successful flight in a heavier-than-air, power-driven machine.
That momentous flight over the sand dunes of Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, lasted a mere twelve seconds.
But it marked the beginning of the age of aviation.
It opened the way for a new industry which has expanded our domestic economy—for a new field of international trade and commerce—and for a world-wide network of communications which has helped to break down the barriers of intolerance and contributed to international understanding.
It led this Nation to a preeminence in global transportation which is still unequaled, and which has contributed to strengthening both our defense and our economy.
In commemoration of the achievements of Orville and Wilbur Wright, the Congress by a joint resolution approved December 17, 1963 (77 Stat. 402), has designated the seventeenth day of December of each year as Wright Brothers Day and has requested the President to issue annually a proclamation inviting the people of the United States to observe that day with appropriate ceremonies and activities.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby call upon the people of this Nation, and their local and national government officials, to observe Wright Brothers Day, December 17, 1966, with appropriate ceremonies and activities, both to recall the accomplishments of the Wright brothers and to provide a stimulus to aviation in this country and throughout the world.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this first day of December in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-six, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-first.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
Secretary of State
NOTE: Proclamation 3757 was released at Austin, Tex. It was not filed with the Office of the Federal Register before the cutoff time of this issue.