Lyndon B. Johnson
December 08, 1966

Statement by the President Announcing the Reaching of an Agreement on an Outer Space Treaty.
I AM GLAD to confirm on the basis of Ambassador Goldberg's report to me this morning that agreement has been reached at the United Nations among members of the Outer Space Committee, including the United States, on a draft text of a treaty governing the exploration of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies.
In accordance with U.N. procedures, it is expected that a resolution endorsing the treaty will be submitted formally early next week with broad cosponsorship along with the agreed text of the Outer Space Treaty.
We look forward to early action by the Assembly on this matter.
Progress toward such a treaty commenced on May 7 of this year when I requested Ambassador Goldberg to initiate consultation for a treaty in the appropriate U.N. body.
After businesslike negotiations within the U.N. Outer Space Committee in Geneva and at the U.N. in New York, this important step toward peace has been achieved.
It is the most important arms control development since the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963. It puts in treaty form the "no bombs in orbit" resolution of the U.N.
It guarantees access to all areas and installations of celestial bodies.
This openness taken with other provisions of the treaty should prevent warlike preparations on the moon and other celestial bodies.
This treaty has historical significance for the new age of space exploration.
I salute and commend all members of the U.N. who contributed to this significant agreement.
In the expectation that formal U.N. action will have been completed at an early date, I plan to present the treaty to the Senate for advice and consent at the next session of Congress and I hope that the United States will be one of the first countries to ratify it.
Note: The statement was read by George Christian, Acting Press Secretary, at his news conference at 11:12 a.m. on Thursday, December 8, 1966, at Austin, Texas. It was not made public in the form of a White House press release.
The treaty was signed in Washington on January 27, 1967, by representatives of 60 nations and was favorably considered by the Senate on April 25, 1967. The text of the treaty is printed in Senate Executive D (90th Cong., 1st sess.).