Lyndon B. Johnson
December 31, 1966

Statement by the President in Response to Report of the President's Commission on Crime in the District of Columbia.
THE President's Commission on Crime in the District of Columbia was charged with a task of major importance--the task of studying the malignant growth of crime in this city, and of devising a comprehensive program to bring it under control. The Commission, assisted by a highly qualified staff and a number of expert consultants, and with the full cooperation of the Federal and District Governments, has worked for almost a year and a half. Its report, which I am releasing today, is both comprehensive in scope, and specific in recommendations. Although there are controversial areas--on some of which the Commission is itself divided-in large measure the question is no longer what we should do. Now it is how soon and how well we can do what is needed.
The report makes it clear that no piecemeal approach to a solution will serve. The actions taken to implement the earlier recommendations on the Police Department are only a beginning. Unless they are matched by actions on other fronts, the improvements being made in that area will fail to realize their full potential. Where the recommendations of the Commission require further study to work out matters of detail, the affected agencies must begin that work without delay. In this work, as well as in any other aspect of the Commission's recommendations, the Federal Government is prepared to extend full cooperation and assistance.
Many of the Commission's recommendations require legislative action or additional appropriations. These will be presented to the Congress as soon as possible, and I am confident that they will receive prompt consideration. I am also hopeful that all of the agencies which have a responsibility in the enforcement and administration of our criminal law will give immediate attention to the recommendations for improvements in their practices and procedures. I will expect periodic reports on progress.
I commend the report, too, to the citizens of Washington. Crime cannot be conquered, in this or any other city, unless citizens are willing to help. An understanding of the nature of the problems and the directions of effective citizen action will permit a mobilization of action by citizens and the private groups and agencies which they direct, to work together to meet the challenge, and the opportunity, which the report presents.
The Commission concludes that many of its recommendations, if implemented promptly, should produce visible short-term results. These must have priority attention. But no one should believe that the scourge of criminal activity will vanish quickly or easily. The report makes it dear that there are no panaceas, no cheap or easy shortcuts. The roots of crime, as the Commission emphasizes, cannot be separated from inadequate education and housing, unemployment, and all the other social and economic ills which the District must also continue to fight.
I wish to express my gratitude to the members of the Commission, who have generously contributed their time and talents for many months. They have my thanks, and the thanks of this community.
Note: The "Report of the President's Commission on Crime in the District of Columbia" (Government Printing Office, 1041 pp.; appendix 777 pp.) was transmitted to the President on December 15.
For the President's statement in response to the Commission's interim report on the Metropolitan Police Department, see Item 354.
The Commission was established by Executive Order 11234 of July 16, 1965 (see 1965 volume, this series, Book II, Items 366 and 381).