Lyndon B. Johnson
December 23, 1967

Statement by the President Upon His Departure From Italy.
I AM LEAVING Italy after a visit which has been very brief but, I believe, very useful and constructive. I have been able to greet and consult with President Saragat, Prime Minister Moro, and Foreign Minister Fanfani and I have had a memorable audience with His Holiness, Pope Paul VI.
Once again, these beneficial exchanges have brought home to me how greatly the conduct of relations between nations has been changed by this new age of rapid communications and travel. While our meetings were necessarily on short notice, we were able to meet as friends who have been able to confer together with relative frequency in recent years--and we were able to discuss current matters on a current basis. This is a new age for statecraft and I believe we can all hope that such closeness between leaders of nations will hasten the day of understanding and cooperation in peace for all men.
The President, the Premier, Foreign Minister, and I reviewed some of the problems confronting the great Atlantic Alliance to which our two countries belong. I was especially gratified by the mutual confidence among us regarding the prospects for the Alliance's future. We also talked about the problem of achieving peace in Southeast Asia and I reviewed with them the continuing determination of the United States to seek every opportunity to bring peace and justice to the people of Vietnam.
In my meeting with His Holiness, we discussed the vital necessity of taking new steps to bring peace to Vietnam and to maintain peace among all nations of the earth. I discussed with His Holiness the plight of the American prisoner being held by the North Vietnamese and being denied the rights required by international standards. I have reviewed in another statement more fully these valued discussions with His Holiness.
I am returning home now to observe Christmas with my family. I do so encouraged by these brief talks in Europe, as by all the talks of this mission. As I leave Italy, I would like to extend to all the people of the great Republic of Italy the greetings of this season and the warmest of good wishes for the year ahead.
Note: The statement was released at Rome, Italy.