Lyndon B. Johnson
December 16, 1964

Remarks at a Televised Ceremony Marking the Change in Leadership at the Department of Commerce.
THIS IS a day of some personal sadness for me. I have in my hand the resignation of Luther Hodges who is departing his post as Secretary of Commerce.
Secretary Hodges is a distinguished American who has served his State and his Nation and has in his entire lifetime given to the American people the best that is in him always for the benefit of his beloved country. His stewardship of the Commerce Department was both progressive and prudent.
I have accepted Secretary Hodges' resignation with deep regret because he is not only a good and wise American but he is. my longtime trusted personal friend. But the American system that produced Luther Hodges has within its gifts the capacity to produce a man to take his place.
I have elected to ask the Senate to give their advice and consent to my nomination of John T. Connor of New Jersey to be Secretary of Commerce.
I truly believe that John Connor is an authentic example of what the American educational and free enterprise system can create. Until yesterday he was the president of Merck & Company, one of the Nation's leading pharmaceutical firms. He was on the board of directors of General Motors and General Foods, and other leading boards. He is a leader on the Committee for Economic Development and the Business Advisory Council.
He is not unacquainted with the ways of Washington. In 1942 he was the General Counsel for the Office of Scientific Research and Development, at that time headed by the distinguished American, Vannevar Bush. In 1945 he became counsel to the new Office of Naval Research, and later special assistant to the late, respected James Forrestal. In between times he served as a rugged Marine and reached the rank of captain.
He graduated from Syracuse University in 1936 magna cum laude, and from Harvard Law School in 1939. I might add that he was not backward in his studies. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
John Connor is the kind of man I am proud to have serve in the Cabinet. He is smart and he is loyal and he is patriotic. He will never discard a principle nor despair of doing what is right and ought to be done. I think the credentials that he bears in his heart and in his mind are the kind of credentials that will make his Nation proud and will cause great achievements to be his legacy in the country that he has served so well and in the Nation that he loves.
I now present to you Mr. Connor.
[Responding, Mr. Connor stated that his appointment as Secretary of Commerce was quite a challenge to him and his family. "From a human point of view," he said, "of course, a change like this is never an easy one to make .... You know." he continued, "the President is often accused of being quite an arm twister. Well, I can testify that at least in this case he didn't even put a hand on my arm, much less twist it, but he did appeal to my mind and to my heart, and particularly to my patriotism, so here I am, and l will do my best." The President then resumed speaking.]
I have asked the new Secretary of Commerce to meet and work with the Secretary of Labor and the voice of American labor in this country, Mr. George Meany. We have had some preliminary meetings, and I hope to see the relationship between business and labor continue in the years ahead as it has in the months behind us.
I know that the distinguished Secretary of Labor, Mr. Wirtz, will be anxious to cooperate, and I expect the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Labor to work very closely in leading the business community and the labor community to a record of all-time harmony and mutual respect in this country.
I thank Mr. Meany for meeting with us this morning, and Secretary Wirtz. I now want to ask Mr. Hodges if he will say a word to you. George Reedy will have available for you Mr. Hodges' letter of resignation and my reply, together with biographical data concerning Mr. Connor.
Secretary Hodges.
[Secretary Hodges responded by expressing his appreciation to the President for the cooperation and confidence he had exhibited toward him. Pointing to the fact that his letter of resignation was written in October he added, "l want to carry out a long-term plan of mine of finishing up at the end of a 4-year term, because I will be approaching 67 before very long. It has been an exhilarating experience," he concluded, "particularly the last year, sir, with you." The President again resumed speaking.]
One final statement before we leave. We will try to make this transition effective on January 15th. We will send the nomination to the Senate at an early date. We have completed the necessary details and investigations and they are behind us and we hope that the takeover can be January 15th.
Secretary Wirtz, did you want to say something?
[Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz expressed his personal satisfaction at having worked with Secretary Hodges in bringing together the interests of American management and American labor and said he looked forward to the opportunity to work with Mr. Connor as he had worked with Secretary Hodges "in bringing forward those elements of unity which

are so important to the national interest." The President then concluded his remark.]
I have asked Mr. Meany to meet with me and other members of American labor before we leave for the Christmas holidays to discuss our program for the coming years.
I have already met with the Economic Council and the Business Council, and I will be conferring from time to time with leading educators, businessmen, and labor men here at the White House, and perhaps at the ranch before the new session.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 11:09 a.m. in the Theater at the White House.
For the President's reply to Secretary Hodges' letter of resignation, see Item 805. Mr. Connor's nomination as Secretary of Commerce was confirmed by the Senate on January 15, 1965.