Lyndon B. Johnson
February 15, 1965

Statement by the President Giving Highlights of His Report on Communications Satellites.
THE CREATION of this commercial communications satellite system involves many complexities. But the work is on a firm basis and is moving ahead rapidly. The first satellite of this planned commercial system is to be launched early this year for the purpose of bridging the Atlantic Ocean. Designs for other potential satellites for the basic global system are being completed.
The orbiting satellites heralded a new day in world communications. For telephone, message data, and television, new pathways in the sky are being developed. They are sky trails to progress in commerce, business, trade, and in relationships and understanding among peoples.
Understanding among peoples is a precondition for a better and more peaceful world. The objectives of the United States are to provide orbital messengers, not only of word, speech, and pictures, but of thought and hope.
The program of the United States in conjunction and cooperation with other countries is moving ahead strongly. Important basic business decisions remain to be made as the system comes into being. But it has moved decisively toward the implementation of the act and is becoming a practical reality.
The United States will seek to broaden the base of international participation in the commercial satellite system by encouraging additional states to join in the ownership of the system and to join in the use of the system as rapidly as technology permits.
The United States will also seek to foster a climate of international cooperation both of a technological and political nature with the objective of providing satellite communications to as many nations of the world as soon as possible in consonance with the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 and applicable resolutions of the United Nations.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House release announcing the report to Congress (see Item 69).
The release stated that the first satellite of the international system, referred to in the President's statement, would be a synchronous satellite, 22,300 miles above the Atlantic, providing service between North America and Europe. The satellite, with up to 240 telephone channels, was planned for launching in March 1965 under contracts between the Communications Satellite Corporation and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. European ground stations were being made ready to function, and the Andover, Maine, station had been leased for the service by the Communications Satellite Corporation.
The release further stated that as of December 31, 1964, the agreement establishing interim arrangements for a global commercial communications satellite system had been signed by the following countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Vatican City.