Lyndon B. Johnson
February 18, 1966

Message to the Congress Transmitting the National Science Foundation's Annual Report on Weather Modification.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am transmitting, for the consideration of the Congress, the Seventh Annual Report on Weather Modification (for Fiscal Year 1965) submitted to me by the Director of the National Science Foundation.
Highly encouraging steps are being taken toward establishing safe and effective programs for modifying the weather. We can now begin to see the day when such programs may become operationally feasible. This is an exciting and encouraging development not only for Americans, but for men everywhere.
Last year, in transmitting to the Congress the Sixth Annual Report, I indicated the need for a larger effort in basic research and in the development of means to put the knowledge we have to work.
That increased effort is noted in this report. It describes not only the vigorous pursuit of weather modification programs by agencies of the Executive Branch but also the valuable stimulus afforded by Committees of the Congress, and the significant activities of nongovernmental groups.
RECENT STUDIES
The list of recent activities in this field is heartening. For example, on January 1, 1966, the first Federal regulation on weather modification became effective. The National Science Foundation issued rules providing that advance notice of intention to modify the weather must be given to the Foundation.
More recently, two significant reports by advisory groups have been issued. A two volume study by a National Academy of Sciences Panel, released January 14, reviewed in detail the physical science aspects of weather and climate modification. Five days later the National Science Foundation's Special Commission on Weather Modification issued a broad report covering the biological and social aspects, statistical problems, problems of law and organization, and international implications, as well as physical science aspects. Additional reports by the Special Commission will soon be forthcoming.
Congress, too, has indicated its interest in scheduling additional hearings on weather and climate modification during this session. It is striking that separate groups dealing seriously with this problem have, after long study, arrived at similar and significant conclusions.
The National Academy of Sciences report, for example, says: "In a sense, weather modification today is a reality. Man can and does interfere with the atmosphere in a number of ways. His ability to produce deliberate beneficial changes is still very limited and uncertain, but it is no longer economically or politically trivial."
The report of the Special Commission, in a markedly similar passage, says, "Weather and climate modification is becoming a reality. The daily activities of man influence the atmosphere in a number of ways and his ability to induce deliberate changes in measurable magnitude by artificial means is progressing."
The report I submit today says it another way: "In 1965, key words are no longer 'whether' and 'when.' They are 'what' and 'how' and 'who'."
PROBLEMS--AND PROGRESS
Two sets of problems face us and both are difficult. One consists of finding out how to modify the weather and climate. The second consists of determining how best to utilize this knowledge for the benefit of mankind once it is achieved.
The scientists and engineers inside and outside the Government must address themselves particularly to the first set of problems. All of us, as concerned citizens, must seriously consider the second.
At present it appears feasible, under appropriate conditions, to seed some kinds of clouds and achieve increased precipitation. It is also possible, under certain conditions, to dissipate some types of fog. Partial success has been reported from abroad in reducing hail damage.
As our understanding of atmospheric processes increases, our ability to do more will also increase. Even now, men are dreaming and planning of projects that will some day enable us to mitigate the awesome and terrible forces of hurricanes and tornadoes. Such a time is still far off, but perhaps not so far off as we thought only a few years ago.
That so much is being done now is a credit not only to the men of science working in the field, but also to the understanding and support of the Congress which has expressed its interest in and support of this field of great national interest. I commend to your continuing interest this report and the important efforts that it describes.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

February 18, 1966
Note: The report, transmitted to the President on January 12, is entitled "Weather Modification; Seventh Annual Report, 1965" (Government Printing Office, 109 pp.).
The President also referred to a report published by the National Academy of Sciences, dated January 1966 and entitled "Weather and Climate Modification-Problems and Prospects" (2 vols., 28 pp. and 198 pp.), and to a report of the Special Commission on Weather Modification, National Science Foundation, entitled "Weather and Climate Modification" (149 pp.).