Lyndon B. Johnson
February 02, 1966

Special Message to the Congress Proposing International Education and Health Programs
To the Congress of the United States:
Last year the Congress by its action declared: the nation's number one task is to improve the education and health of our people.
Today I call upon Congress to add a world dimension to this task.
I urge the passage of the International Education and Health Acts of 1966.
We would be shortsighted to confine our vision to this nation's shorelines. The same rewards we count at home will flow from sharing in a worldwide effort to rid mankind of the slavery of ignorance and the scourge of disease.
We bear a special role in this liberating mission. Our resources will be wasted in defending freedom's frontiers if we neglect the spirit that makes men want to be free.
Half a century ago, the philosopher William James declared that mankind must seek "a moral equivalent of war."
The search continues--more urgent today than ever before in man's history.
Ours is the great opportunity to challenge all nations, friend and foe alike, to join this battle.

We have made hopeful beginnings. Many of the programs described in this message have been tested in practice. I have directed our agencies of government to improve and enlarge the programs already authorized by Congress.
Now I am requesting Congress to give new purpose and new power to our efforts by declaring that:

--programs to advance education and health are basic building blocks to lasting peace.

--they represent a long-term commitment in the national interest.

--the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare is charged with a broad authority to help strengthen our country's capacity to carry on this noble adventure.
EDUCATION
Education lies at the heart of every nation's hopes and purposes. It must be at the heart of our international relations.
We have long supported UNESCO and other multilateral and international agencies. We propose to continue these efforts with renewed vigor.
Schooled in the grief of war, we know certain truths are self-evident in every nation on this earth:

--Ideas, not armaments, will shape our lasting prospects for peace.

--The conduct of our foreign policy will advance no faster than the curriculum of our classrooms.

--The knowledge of our citizens is one treasure which grows only when it is shared.
International education cannot be the work of one country. It is the responsibility and promise of all nations. It calls for free exchange and full collaboration. We expect to receive as much as we give, to learn as well as to teach.
Let this nation play its part. To this end, I propose: --to strengthen our capacity for international educational cooperation.

--to stimulate exchange with students and teachers of other lands.

--to assist the progress of education in developing nations.

--to build new bridges of international understanding.
I. TO STRENGTHEN OUR CAPACITY FOR INTERNATIONAL EDUCATIONAL COOPERATION
Our education base in this country is strong. Our desire to work with other nations is great. But we must review and renew the purpose of our programs for international education. I propose to:
I. Direct the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare to establish within his Department a Center for Educational Coo operation.
This Center will be a focal point for leadership in international education. While it will not supplant other governmental agencies already conducting programs in this field, it will:

--Act as a channel for communication between our missions abroad and the U.S. educational community;

--Direct programs assigned to the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare;

--Assist public and private agencies conducting international education programs.
2. Appoint a Council on International Education.
Our commitment to international education must draw on the wisdom, experience, and energy of many people. This Council, to be composed of outstanding leaders of American education, business, labor, the professions, and philanthropy, will advise the Center for Educational Cooperation.
3. Create a Corps of Education Officers to serve in the United States Foreign Service. As education's representatives abroad, they will give sharper direction to our programs. Recruited from the ranks of outstanding educators, they will report directly to the Ambassador when serving in foreign missions.
4. Stimulate New Programs in International Studies for Elementary and Secondary Schools.
No child should grow to manhood in America without realizing the promise and the peril of the world beyond our borders. Progress in teaching about world affairs must not lag behind progress made in other areas of American education.
I am directing the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare to earmark funds from Title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, so that our regional education laboratories can enrich the international curricula of our elementary and secondary schools.
5. Support Programs of International Scope in Smaller and Developing Colleges. Many of our nation's institutions have been unable to share fully in international projects. By a new program of incentive grants administered through HEW these institutions will be encouraged to play a more active role.
6. Strengthen Centers of Special Competence in International Research and Training.
Over the past two decades, our universities have been a major resource in carrying on development programs around the world. We have made heavy demands upon them. But we have not supported them adequately.
I recommend to the Congress a program of incentive grants administered by HEW for universities and groups of universities--
(a) to promote centers of excellence in dealing with particular problems and particular regions of the world,
(b) to develop administrative staff and faculties adequate to maintain long-term commitments to overseas educational enterprises.
In addition, I propose that AID be given authority to provide support to American research and educational institutions, for increasing their capacity to deal with programs of economic and social development abroad.
II. TO STIMULATE EXCHANGE WITH THE STUDENTS AND TEACHERS OF OTHER LANDS
Only when people know about--and care about--each other will nations learn to live together in harmony. I therefore propose that we:
1. Encourage the Growth of School-to-School Partnerships.
Through such partnerships, already pioneered on a small scale, a U.S. school may assist the brick-and-mortar construction of a sister school in less developed nations. The exchange can grow to include books and equipment, teacher and student visits.
To children, it can bring deep understanding and lasting friendships.
I recommend a goal of 1,000 school-to-school partnerships.
This program will be administered by the Peace Corps, in cooperation with AID, particularly its Partners of the Alliance Program. The chief cost will be borne by the voluntary contributions of the participating schools.
2. Establish an Exchange Peace Corps. Our nation has no better ambassadors than the young volunteers who serve in 46 countries in the Peace Corps. I propose that we welcome similar ambassadors to our shores. We need their special skills and understanding, just as they need ours.
These "Volunteers to America" will teach their own language and culture in our schools and colleges. They will serve in community programs alongside VISTA Volunteers. As our Peace Corps Volunteers learn while they serve, those coming to the United States will be helped to gain training to prepare them for further service when they return home.
I propose an initial goal of 5,000 volunteers.

3. Establish an American Education Placement Service.
We have in the United States a reservoir of talent and good will not yet fully tapped:

--school and college teachers eager to serve abroad;

--professors and administrators who are retired or on sabbatical leave;

--Peace Corps volunteers who desire further foreign service.
To encourage these men and women to assist in the developing nations and elsewhere, I recommend that we establish an American Education Placement Service in HEW.
It will act as an international recruitment bureau for American teachers, and will provide supplemental assistance for those going to areas of special hardship.
In time, I hope this Service will lead to the development of a World Teacher Exchange-in which all nations may join to bring their classrooms into closer relationship with one another.
III. TO ASSIST THE PROGRESS OF EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING NATIONS
To provide direct support for those countries straggling to improve their education standards, I propose that we:

I. Enlarge AID programs of education assistance.
In my message on Foreign Assistance, I directed AID to make a major effort in programs of direct educational benefit. These will emphasize teacher training--vocational and scientific education--construction of education facilities--specialized training in the U.S. for foreign students--and help in publishing badly needed textbooks.
2. Develop new Techniques for Teaching Basic Education and Fighting Illiteracy.
Our own research and development in the learning process can be adapted to fit the needs of other countries. Modern technology and new communications techniques have the power to multiply the resources available to a school system.
I am calling on HEW to support basic education research of 'value to the developing nations.
I am requesting AID to conduct studies and assist pilot projects for applying technology to meet critical education shortages.
3. Expand U.S. Summer Teaching Corps. The Agency for International Development now administers programs for American teachers and professors who participate in summer workshops in less developed countries. They serve effectively to support teacher training in these countries. They also enrich their own teaching experience.
I propose this year that AID double the number of U.S. participants in the Summer Teaching Corps.
4. Assist the Teaching of English Abroad. Many of the newer nations have a vital need to maintain English as the language of international communication and national development. We must help meet this demand even as we extend the teaching of foreign languages in our own schools.
I have directed AID, supported by other agencies, to intensify its efforts for those countries which seek our help.
5. Establish Bi-National Educational Foundations.
We have at our disposal excess foreign currencies in a number of developing nations. Where conditions are favorable, I propose that significant amounts of these currencies be used to support Bi-National Educational Foundations. Governed by leading citizens from the two nations, they would have opportunities much like those afforded major foundations in the United States to invest in basic educational development.
To the extent further currencies are created by our sales of agricultural commodities abroad, I propose that a portion be earmarked for educational uses, particularly to assist technical training in food production.
IV. TO BUILD NEW BRIDGES OF INTERNATIONAL
UNDERSTANDING
The job of international education must extend beyond the classroom. Conferences of experts from many nations, the free flow of books and ideas, the exchange of works of science and imagination can enrich every citizen. I propose steps to:
1. Stimulate Conferences of Leaders and Experts.
I have directed every department and agency to support a series of seminars for representatives from every discipline and every culture to seek answers to the common problems of mankind.
We are ready to serve as host to international gatherings. I have therefore called on the Secretary of State and the Attorney General to explore ways to remove unnecessary hindrances in granting visas to guests invited from abroad.
2. Increase the Flow of Books and Other Educational Material.
I recommend prompt passage of legislation to implement the Florence Agreement and thus stimulate the movement of books and other educational material between nations. This Agreement was signed by representatives of the U.S. Government in 1959 and ratified by the Senate in 1960. This necessary Congressional action is long overdue to eliminate duties and remove barriers for the importation of educational materials.
I also recommend that Congress implement the Beirut Agreement to permit duty-free entry of visual and auditory materials of an educational, scientific or cultural nature.
Finally, we must encourage American private enterprise to participate actively in educational exchange. I urge the Congress to amend the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 to permit improvements in the Informational Media Guarantee Program.
3. Improve the Quality of U.S. Schools and Colleges abroad.
We have a potentially rich resource in the American elementary and secondary schools and colleges overseas assisted by the Department of State and AID.
They should be showcases for excellence in education.
They should help make overseas service attractive to our own citizens.
They should provide close contact with students and teachers of the host country.
I request additional support to assist those institutions which meet these standards.

4. Create Special Programs for Future Leaders Studying in the United States.
There are some 90,000 foreign students now enrolled in U.S. institutions. Many of them will someday play leading roles in their own countries. We must identify and assist these potential leaders.
I recommend that HEW and AID provide grants to enrich their educational experience through special courses and summer institutes.
HEALTH
The well-being of any nation rests fundamentally upon the health of its people.
If they are cursed by disease, their hopes grow dim.
If they are plagued by hunger, even the blessings of liberty give little comfort.
We have committed ourselves for many years to relieving human suffering. Today our effort must keep pace with a growing world and with growing problems.

Therefore, I propose a program to: --create an International Career Service in Health;

--help meet health manpower needs in developing nations;

--combat malnutrition;
--control and eradicate disease;

--cooperate in worldwide efforts to deal with population problems.
I. CREATE AN INTERNATIONAL CAREER SERVICE
IN HEALTH
The first requirement of an International Health Program is trained manpower. I propose to:
1. Increase the supply of trained Americans.
I recommend a program of Public Health Service grants to our universities and professional schools. Our first year goal will be to increase by at least 500 the number of graduate students preparing to participate in international health activities.
2. Establish a select corps of International Health Associates.
The Public Health Service will recruit young professionals in the health disciplines to be available for assignments at home and overseas. Through service with AID, the Peace Corps, and international organizations, they will gain experience as the first step in building careers in international health.
I recommend recruitment of 100 outstanding young Americans to be the freshman class of International Health Associates.

3. Establish a program of Fellows in International Health.
I propose that 50 special fellowships be awarded to the best qualified young Americans with previous experience overseas and demonstrated capacity for leadership. With the help of advanced training, they will prepare for ever more rewarding service in this challenging career.
4. Create an International Corps in the Public Health Service.
I have directed the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare to build a career service corps competent to sustain the international health programs in which this country participates.
II. TO HELP MEET THE HEALTH MANPOWER NEEDS OF DEVELOPING NATIONS
In many countries, the struggle for better health is crippled by severe shortages not only of physicians but of all health workers-nurses, sanitarians, laboratory technicians, public health workers, health educators, hospital administrators, and others.
We must work for the day when each country will be able to train, in its own institutions, the health workers it needs. Meanwhile, we must assist in relieving critical manpower needs. Toward these ends I propose to:
I. More than double the present AID program to strengthen medical and health training institutions in the developing nations.
This program supports construction of teaching and laboratory facilities, modernization of teaching materials and methods, and assignments of American faculty abroad.
2. Enable the Peace Corps to recruit and provide more volunteers for service in the health manpower programs of the developing nations.
This will require an expanded recruitment effort, new programs of training and an increased emphasis on health.
III. TO COMBAT MALNUTRITION
Last year, in a special message to Congress, I emphasized the cost of malnutrition to the developing nations. This cost is counted in stunted human and national growth.
Since then, we have done much to combat hunger. Today, our Food for Peace programs reach about 100 million people.
With our help, a number of countries have begun to establish self-sustaining programs to conquer malnutrition. Through international organizations--the Food and Agriculture Organization, UNICEF, the World Health Organization--we have added further resources to this struggle.
But food production has not kept pace with the increasing demands of expanding population.
Where food is scarce, babies, young children, and mothers are the first affected. By 1967, nearly 270 million of the world's children will suffer from malnutrition. The legions of the hungry will grow unless mankind acts to meet this peril.
This nation must play a larger role in combatting malnutrition, especially among the young. I propose to:
1. Establish a Head Start Nutritional Program to increase the number of infants, children, and mothers receiving adequate diets under the Food for Peace Program.
Our assistance currently reaches about 70 million children, 10 million of whom are under 5 years of age. Our goal must be to help the developing nations start or expand programs that will reach 150 million children within the next five years.
To overcome the most serious nutritional diseases, I have directed AID to enlarge its program for enriching milk and other Food for Peace commodities with vitamins and minerals.

2. Provide Training in Nutrition.
The developing nations need trained manpower--professional, technical and administrative-to carry out effective nutrition programs.
I am requesting that Congress appropriate funds for AID to support training in the United States for nutrition specialists from the developing countries and to support training institutions that have been established in 27 nations.
3. Expand Research on Malnutrition.
We need to know much more about the effects of nutritional deficiency; the cheapest and best ways to apply technological advances; and how to develop new, rich sources of protein. I am requesting funds for AID to expand basic and applied research in these areas.
IV. TO CONTROL AND ERADICATE DISEASES
In the rich nations, a healthy childhood is the birthright of most children.
But in the poor nations, children die daily of diarrheal diseases and cholera. Smallpox, malaria and yellow fever--all preventable diseases--drain the health of the people and the economy of the nation. Animal diseases destroy desperately needed food.
To launch a simultaneous and concerted attack upon these major infectious diseases, I propose that we initiate or enlarge programs to:
1. Eradicate malaria--within ten years-from the Western Hemisphere, Ethiopia, Nepal, Jordan, the Philippines, Thailand, India, Pakistan and Iran.
The United States assists 15 malaria eradication programs now in progress. I am requesting additional funds to expand these programs, and thus bring freedom from this disease to more than 800 million people in the coming decade.
We will strengthen the Pan American Health Organization as coordinator of the hemispheric attack on malaria. We will support the efforts of the World Health Organization.
2. Eradicate smallpox throughout the world by 1975.
Toward this goal, we will continue our support for the World Health Organization and provide special AID support for 19 West African countries which have requested our assistance.
3. Reduce the hazard of measles. Measles, a relatively mild disease in our country, is virulent in others. It kills many children. It leaves others blind, deaf, or mentally retarded. AID and the Public Health Service have conducted a successful pilot project in measles immunization in Upper Volta. Since then, nearly all the neighboring West African countries have requested similar assistance. AID will expand its vaccination program to help those countries control measles within the next five years.
4. Develop the means to control cholera and diarrheal diseases in developing nations. Because cholera cannot yet be prevented, we must develop more effective means of control. Through our own research, through cooperative programs with Japan, and through continued assistance to the SEATO Cholera Research Center in East Pakistan, we will move actively to curb the outbreak of this dread disease.
Diarrheal disease, a major cause of infant death in the poor nations, is transmitted largely through contaminated water. Working directly with these nations and with international organizations, AID will expand worldwide programs to ensure safe water supplies.
5. Control animal diseases.
Control or eradication of animal diseases could increase the meat supply by more than 25 percent in a number of developing nations. As many as three-fourths of the rural population suffer from debilitating diseases that originate in animals.
I am requesting funds to support the Pan American Health Organization in developing and testing vaccines against rabies and foot and mouth disease. In addition, we will support PAHO as it initiates and expands control measures against foot and mouth disease in several Latin American countries.
6. Expand U.S.-Japan Science Cooperation.
In 1965 we joined Japan in a cooperative science program to combat some of the major diseases of Asia--leprosy, parasitic diseases, tuberculosis, cholera and malnutrition. I am requesting funds to expand this important venture administered through the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
V. TO COOPERATE IN WORLDWIDE EFFORTS TO
DEAL WITH POPULATION PROBLEMS
By 1970, there will be 300 million more people on this earth. A reliable estimate shows, that at present rates of growth, the world population could double by the end of the century. The growing gap--between food to eat and mouths to feed--poses one of mankind's greatest challenges. It threatens the dignity of the individual and the sanctity of the family.
We must meet these problems in ways that will strengthen free societies--and protect the individual right to freedom of choice.
To mobilize our resources more effectively, I propose programs to:
1. Expand Research in Human Reproduction and Population Dynamics.
We are supporting research efforts through the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, AID and the World Health Organization. I am requesting funds to increase the pace and scope of this effort. The effort to be successful will require a full response by our scientific community.
2. Enlarge the training of American and foreign specialists in the population field.
We are supporting training programs and the development of training programs through the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and AID. We will expand these programs at home and abroad.

3. Assist family planning programs in nations which request such help.
Here at home, we are gaining valuable experience through new programs of maternal and infant care as well as expansion of private and public medical care programs.
Early last year we made dear our readiness to share our knowledge, skill and financial resources with the developing nations requesting assistance. We will expand this effort in response to the increasing number of requests from other countries.
THE CHOICE WE MUST MAKE
We call on rich nations and poor nations to join with us--to help each other and to help themselves. This must be the first work of the world for generations to come,
For our part, the programs in International Education and Health I am recommending this year will total $524 million:

--$354 million in the foreign assistance program.

--$103 million in the Health, Education, and Welfare Department program.

--$11 million in the Peace Corps program.

--$56 million in the State Department cultural and education program.
As I indicated in my message on Foreign Assistance yesterday, these programs will be conducted in a manner consistent with our balance of payments policy.
Last Fall, speaking to a gathering of the world's scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, I said: "... We can generate growing light in our universe--or we can allow the darkness to gather."
In the few months since then, forty-four million more children have come into the world. With them come more hunger-and more hope.
Since that time the gross national product of our nation has passed the $700 billion mark.
The choice between light and darkness, between health and sickness, between knowledge and ignorance, is not one that we can ignore.
The light we generate can be the brightest hope of history. It can illuminate the way toward a better life for all. But the darkness--if we let it gather--can become the final, terrible midnight of mankind.
The International Education and Health Acts of 1966 present an opportunity to begin a great shared adventure with other nations.
I urge the Congress to act swiftly for passage of both measures.

Our national interest warrants it.

The work of peace demands it.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

February 2, 1966
Note: The International Education Act of 1966 was approved by the President on October 29, 1966 (see Item 557). The proposed International Health Act was not adopted by the 89th Congress.
See also Item 46.