Lyndon B. Johnson
February 14, 1967

Proclamation 3767—National Poison Prevention Week, 1967

Americans enjoy one of the highest standards of health and medical care in the world.
Among children, disease has been steadily reduced by technological advances such as vaccines, antibiotics, and other medications. Among the elderly, other discoveries have helped to alleviate pain and suffering from chronic diseases.
The products of technology have lightened household chores and provided more time for leisure. But with this progress has come increased danger of poisoning in the home because of the wide use of such toxic substances as polishes, cleaners, solvents, pesticides, and medicines.
Most victims of poisoning in the home are young children. They need our protection—protection that we can provide only by using dangerous products with caution and taking the time and trouble to store them completely beyond the reach of children.
Recognizing the need for attention to the constant threat of accidental poisoning, the Congress, by a joint resolution approved September 26, 1961 (75 Stat. 681), has requested the President to issue annually a proclamation designating the third week in March as National Poison Prevention Week:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby proclaim the week beginning March 19, 1967, as National Poison Prevention Week.
I direct the appropriate agencies of the Federal Government, and I invite State and local governments and organizations, to participate actively in programs designed to promote better protection against accidental poisonings, particularly among children.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this fourteenth day of February in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-seven, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-first.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
NICHOLAS DEB. KATZENBACH
Acting Secretary of State
NOTE: Proclamation 3767 was not filed with the Office of the Federal Register before the cutoff time of this issue. As printed above, it follows the text of the White House press release.