Lyndon B. Johnson
February 02, 1965

Remarks at the Signing of a Jurisdictional Disputes Agreement for the Construction Industry.
Ladies and gentlemen:
This is a very happy and heartening occasion for me. Your industry, one of the largest private employers in America, is offering a very fine example of free and responsible collective bargaining. All of you can be proud of the part you played in achieving this agreement.
Your agreement is not the result of any governmental edict or intervention. It is the successful product of long and hard negotiations and it provides a better way of settling jurisdictional disputes in the construction industry privately and without work stoppages.
I believe that this agreement should limit the use of governmental dispute settlement procedures as Congress intended. I am sure it will help expedite our defense construction program and pave the way for continued expansion of industrial, commercial, and residential construction.
In 1948 you established the National Joint Board to settle disputes and it has made a great contribution to industrial peace. However, time has revealed the need for many changes. In the past 4 years your ability to settle your disputes with regard for the public interest has been seriously tested at our missile sites. Despite problems as recent as yesterday, I think all of you can be proud of the of that record as a whole.
The agreement that you have signed is a product of your own recognition of what the interest of your industry and your country require of us. I especially wish to compliment you on providing for consideration not only the equities of the parties affected but also the interests of the consumers of this country.
The country will continue to look to you for leadership. As you have responded be. fore, I am hopeful and confident you will always respond to the best interests of this Nation.
In the challenges ahead for all of us I would ask your cooperation toward improving and expanding our economy, toward extending its opportunities more fully to all of our citizens. The work of building a better America is work that is never done and I am sure the country can count on you to keep our effort moving forward.
So the results of the months of negotiations that bring us to signing this agreement are very pleasing to me this morning. welcome you to the White House to see I executed and I shall follow the discharge of it with great pleasure in the days to come Thank you very much, all of you.
Note: The President spoke at 12:15 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House at the signing of the new jurisdictional disputes agreement by representatives of the construction industry.