Lyndon B. Johnson
February 27, 1967

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 1 of 1967, Functions Relating to Ship Mortgages
To the Congress of the United States:
I am transmitting Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1967.
This plan would transfer from the Secretary of Commerce to the Secretary of Transportation authority to approve the surrender of certain ship documents. These documents include certificates of ownership, declarations of citizenship and related ship papers issued for commercial vessels covered by preferred mortgages or owned by the U.S.
Under the Act establishing the Department of Transportation, the Secretary of Transportation, acting through the Coast Guard, will have responsibility for recording bills of sale, transfers and mortgages of ships; for issuing new marine documents; and for retaining custody of preferred mortgages on vessels.
The Secretary of Transportation will not, however, have the authority to approve the surrender of documents for vessels covered by preferred mortgages. That authority still resides with the Secretary of Commerce.
As a result, shipowners will have to deal with two separate Departments of the Federal Government every time a ship's name is changed, its structure is modified, or it is sold or transferred.
In each of these and other cases, the shipowner must first seek the approval of the Secretary of Commerce to surrender the ship's documents and then request the Secretary of Transportation to issue new documents.
The reorganization plan is designed to eliminate this duplication of effort, and to save time and expense for shipowners.
This is not a major reorganization plan. But it is important. It is part of our larger effort to streamline the Government, to make its operations as efficient as possible, and to enable it to provide better service to the citizens and businessmen of this country.
This plan has been prepared in accordance with Chapter 9 of Title V of the United States Code. I have found, after investigation, that the reorganization is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 901(a) of that title.
I recommend that the Congress allow the reorganization plan to become effective.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

February 27, 1967
Note: Reorganization Plan 1 of 1967 became effective on May 9, 1967. The text is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, the Federal Register, and Title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (3 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 330; 32 F.R. 7049; 3 CFR, 1967 Comp., p. 344).