Lyndon B. Johnson
February 27, 1967

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House on Executive Order 11322 "Trade and Other Transactions Involving Southern Rhodesia."
Dear Mr. President: (Dear Mr. Speaker:)
By virtue of my authority under Section 5 of the United Nations Participation Act of 1945, as amended, I issued on January 5, 1967 Executive Order No. 11322 relating to trade and other transactions involving Southern Rhodesia.
A copy of the Order is attached.
It prohibits the importation into the United States of Rhodesian asbestos, iron ore, chrome, pig iron, sugar, tobacco, copper, meat and meat products, and hides, skins and leather, as well as dealings by United States nationals or in U.S. territories in such products originating in Southern Rhodesia. It also embargoes shipments to Southern Rhodesia from the United States of arms, military equipment, aircraft, motor vehicles, and petroleum and petroleum products.
I have delegated to the Secretaries of State, Commerce and the Treasury the authority to promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out the Order.
The Executive Order implements the action of the United Nations Security Council reflected in its Resolution No. 232, adopted on December 16, 1966, on which the Representative of the United States voted affirmatively. In this resolution the Security Council determined that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a threat to peace under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and decided that all states should apply selective mandatory economic sanctions against that territory in accordance with Article 41 of the Charter. A copy of the Security Council resolution is attached.
I am submitting this report to the Congress under Section 4 of the United Nations Participation Act, as amended. The Secretary of State will submit a subsequent letter providing additional background about the United States position.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Hubert H. Humphrey, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Executive Order 11322 is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 3, p. 8), the Federal Register (32 F.R. 119), and in Title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (3 CFR, 1967 Comp., p. 243).