Lyndon B. Johnson
February 08, 1966

Remarks at the Los Angeles International Airport Following the President's Return From Honolulu.
Governor Brown, Mayor Yorty, ladies and gentlemen:
We went to Honolulu to meet the leaders of the Government of South Vietnam. They and their people understand, and we understand, that the war we are helping them fight must be a war that will be won on two fronts.
One front is the military. The other front is the struggle against social injustice, against hunger and disease and ignorance, against political apathy and indifference.
The meeting in Honolulu could take place, and take place successfully, because, as our friends from Saigon said in their part of the Declaration of Honolulu, "We are a Government, indeed a generation, of revolutionary transformation." And as I looked across the table at these brave and determined young men, I thought also of the young Vietnamese soldiers and province chiefs, and teachers and student leaders, who are really a part of this new generation.
They know and we know that this revolutionary transformation cannot wait until the guns grow silent and until the terrorism stops.
With that common understanding, we took these last 3 days together to take stock of where we are and where we must go in the days and the weeks and the months that are ahead of all of us.
We talked of many very special and specific things. We talked of rural construction, of agricultural credits, of rural electrification, of new seeds and fertilizers for their crops, of schools and teachers and textbooks for their children, of medical schools and clinics and equipment to give them better health, of how to give training and education to the refugees, of how to deal with inflation in a war-torn country, of how to build the bases for a democratic constitution and for free elections, of how to seek the peace, and of how to effectively conduct the war.
In all of these fields we set targets, and we set concrete targets. Progress is not going to be easy. And I think I should tell you in many fields it is not going to be even quick. But the leaders of both of the Governments are determined that we are going to move forward and we are going to make progress.
We shall meet again in the next few months, and we will measure the progress that we have made. On our part, Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman, with an expert staff, with the Vice President, Hubert Humphrey, will be going to Saigon tomorrow morning to see how we can help with the food and rural developments.
Missions will follow that have been organized by Secretary Gardner in the field of education, in the field of health, and in other fields where our people can help with the work of social construction in South Vietnam.
The distinguished Vice President, standing with me here tonight, has followed our work over the cable lines, and I have been in frequent contact with him the last 3 days. He is leaving Los Angeles immediately to carry forward the mission that we outlined and we agreed upon, and we defined at this very unusual conference in Honolulu.
He will go first to Saigon, to assure that our representatives there get to work rapidly and effectively on the tasks that we laid out at Honolulu. He will fly to Saigon with the leaders of the Government of South Vietnam, and on the way he will learn how they intend to carry forward their part of the plan in these fields.
The Vice President will go from Saigon to other capitals in Asia, to explain what was done at Honolulu and the real meaning of our work there. He will also, on behalf of our Government, ask for the understanding and the support of other nations.
With him will be some of those who were at the Honolulu conference, like our revered Ambassador, Averell Harriman, and my Special Assistant for National Security, McGeorge Bundy.
So I have come back here tonight to the mainland refreshed and confident. The road ahead may be long and may be difficult. It will require the unfailing unity of our people in support of the courageous young Americans who, with their comrades from South Vietnam and Australia, and Korea and New Zealand, are tonight fighting and suffering for us. They are out there dying in order to save freedom. We shall give them that support, and we shall fight the battle against aggression in Vietnam to a successful conclusion.
We shall fight the battle for social construction and throughout the world we shall fight the battle for peace. And to the American people who have given us their strength in every hour of trial, I say to you that we shall fight all of these battles successfully, and we shall prevail.
Note: The President spoke at 9:40 p.m. at the Los Angeles International Airport. His opening words referred to Governor Edmund G. (Pat) Brown of California and Mayor Samuel W. Yorty of Los Angeles. During his remarks he referred to Lt. Gen. Nguyen Van Thieu, Chairman of the National Leadership Committee, and Prime Minister Nguyen Cao Ky, both of the Republic of Vietnam, Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman, Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare John W. Gardner, Ambassador at Large W. Averell Harriman, and Special Assistant to the President McGeorge Bundy.
Following the President's remarks the Vice President spoke briefly. His remarks are printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 2, p. 189).
With respect to the missions to Vietnam of Vice President Humphrey, Secretary Freeman, and Secretary Gardner, see Items 85 and 106.
See also Items 53-55.