Lyndon B. Johnson
February 01, 1966

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Report Relating to Classification in the Tariff Schedules of Textured Yarns
To the Congress of the United States:
I am transmitting herewith, in accordance with section 2 of Public Law 89-229, a report concerning the feasibility and desirability of separate classification in the Tariff Schedules of the United States for those articles of manmade fibers commonly referred to as textured or texturized yarns.
The report concludes that such separate tariff classification for textured yarns is feasible but not desirable in view of the current situation.
Textured yarn production in the United States has been rising steadily in recent years, from 74 million pounds in 1960 to over 250 million pounds in 1965. During this period, the independent throwster industry, which processes a major portion of textured yarn, has had rising employment. At the same time, imports have been declining. The Tariff Commission has estimated that the annual imports of textured yarns declined from more than two million pounds in 1962 to less than one million pounds in 1965, representing less than one-half of one percent of the domestic market.
However, the representatives of the domestic industry have argued that a serious threat of injury looms in the future. In part because of this concern, the report recommends that more accurate import data for textured yarns be provided in the future, so that Congress, the Executive Branch, and the industry can keep close watch on import levels and consider additional measures should they be warranted. I am therefore directing that steps be taken to obtain more accurate data on imports of textured yarns.
I am also transmitting for the information of the Congress the report of the Tariff Commission on textured yarns which I requested.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

February 1, 1966
Note: The report of the United States Tariff Commission, dated December 1965, is entitled "Textured Yarns, Report to the President on Investigation No. 332-46 Under Section 332 of the Tariff Act of 1930 Pursuant to the President's Request of October 1, 1965" (TC Publication 166, 52 pp.).
A "Presidential Report on Textured Yarns of Man-Made Fibers" (5 PP., processed) was also made public by the White House.