Lyndon B. Johnson
February 28, 1965

Remarks Recorded for the Opening of the Red Cross Campaign.
My fellow Americans:
The next 31 days have a special significance for us all. The month of March is Red Cross Month--a time when by our support, we give the Red Cross strength for the tasks of the year ahead.
Those tasks which fall to the Red Cross are numerous and many--at home and all around the world.
In other lands--and in our own land-the Red Cross is going to be called upon to help many of the members of our peacetime Armed Forces when help means the most.
The national organization and its 3,500 chapters will respond to both emergency and long-range recovery needs of the victims of 12,000 to 14,000 disasters this year alone.
The Red Cross will supply half of all the blood that is used by our doctors and our hospitals for patients--both civilian and military.
It will carry on the programs that have helped to save countless lives by teaching more than 50 million Americans the skills of first aid and water safety, since the beginning of the program.
Also, through our public and private schools, the Red Cross will offer more than 18 million youths the opportunity to learn the value of community service by participating in it, side by side with adults.
Every day we receive the benefits of these community services that are rendered by the faithful and the unselfish work of millions of Red Cross volunteers.
We need our Red Cross.
Our Red Cross needs us.
Our strength and support assures the strength and success of the Red Cross as it works for us all.
So, as President of the United States of America and as Honorary Chairman of the American Red Cross, it is my great privilege to proclaim the month of March as Red Cross Month.
This year I ask and I urge each of you to join up, to join in the support that your Red Cross needs--and do it in every way that you can. Your help now can keep the Red Cross ready to answer the calls for help whenever and wherever they are heard.
I know Americans will respond to this urgent and deserving need.
Note: The President had designated March 1965 as Red Cross Month on January 28 (Proclamation 3636; 30 F.R. 1109; 3 CFR, 1965 Supp.). His remarks were filmed and recorded in advance for broadcast at the opening of the campaign.