Lyndon B. Johnson
January 16, 1967

Remarks at the Swearing In of Alan S. Boyd as Secretary of the New Department of Transportation.
Secretary and Mrs. Boyd, Members of the Cabinet, Members of Congress, Judge Durfee, ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests:
There are many enjoyable things that come to a President in the performance of his duty each day and each week, but none have come to me lately that I enjoy more than what I am about to do this morning.
That is, to welcome, as an outstanding merit appointment to the President's Cabinet, a distinguished public official--one who has served with great credit to his State, to his family, and to his people.
Alan Boyd will undertake a major assignment in attempting to coordinate a national transportation policy for this great land of ours.
He will bring together, as authorized and approved by the Congress, more than 30 various agencies, and attempt to get economy and efficiency and give the kind of results that the American people would like to point to with pride.
I said, when I realized we would have a new Transportation Department, that I wanted to look this country over and select the most competent man available for this assignment.
You might not believe this--and maybe my credibility will be attacked for saying it-but the pressures were relatively few. I don't recall any--although somebody might produce a letter.
But I had the best personnel man in the Government look far and wide throughout the land. I reviewed every single prospect that we could think of.
We looked at business, we looked at labor, we looked at public officials, we looked at State commissions, and so forth. And the one and only name that came up was Alan Boyd.
I asked him to come to see me and to take this assignment. He has agreed to do so. In doing so, he is doing so at great sacrifice to himself financially and to his family recreationally.
I hope that it will be of great benefit to all the Nation. I believe it will be.
Mr. Secretary, we are ready to swear you in and welcome you to the Cabinet.
Note: The President spoke at 11:36 a.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Judge James R. Durfee of the United States Court of Claims, who administered the oath of office.