Lyndon B. Johnson
January 28, 1964

Statement by the President Upon Making Public a Report "family Breadwinners - Their Special Training Needs."
THE full economic implications of unemployment for breadwinners have been masked in recent years by their relatively low unemployment rates. forgotten are the dependents of these men and women who are the sole support of their families. The report I am issuing today emphasizes the serious adverse effect of unemployment on the dependents--especially the children-of family breadwinners.
The cycle of poverty begins here. If we are to wage a successful war against poverty in the United States, then we must begin by helping all workers with family responsibilities to find a productive place in the American economy.
Our success in breaking the cycle of poverty will depend to a great extent on how well we are able to help the Nation's unemployed breadwinners solve their economic problems. Investments in training and other assistance to enable unemployed breadwinners to make adjustments to today's rapidly changing world of work can yield returns in increased tax revenues, lower social welfare costs, and better education, housing, and health care for future generations of Americans.
Note: The statement is part of a White House release summarizing the report prepared by the Manpower Administration of the Department of Labor (Manpower Research Bulletin Number 5, dated January 1964, Government Printing Office, 16 pp.).
The report points out that in 1962, 11.5 million children under the age of 18 were being raised in families with an annual income of less than $3,000. It emphasizes the special problems of many groups of breadwinners and, in order to meet these problems, calls for an expansion of training and retraining programs; a reassessment of the adequacy of allowances paid to family heads while they are in training; special attention to the welfare of the children of working mothers; and expanded counseling and guidance services for those seeking employment opportunities.