Lyndon B. Johnson
January 30, 1967

Memorandum Urging Support of the Red Cross by Federal Employees and Members of the Armed Forces
Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies
The American Red Cross has important responsibilities. The greatest of these is to express in practical terms our concern for our neighbors when they are beset by the upheavals of war and disaster. This is the mission assigned to the Red Cross in its Congressional Charter. This is the mission it has accomplished superbly for more than 85 years at home and abroad. The organization has earned our admiration and appreciation the hard way--through hard work.
Today men and women of the Red Cross are serving with our men in Viet-Nam, in the jungles, in the hamlets, in the military hospitals, and in recreation units behind the lines. Other staff members and thousands of volunteers are helping with the problems and emergencies of American servicemen and their families in this country and at many overseas military installations.
Each year the Red Cross mobilizes its resources to extend emergency relief and recovery aid to the victims of some 300 major disasters, while through the Red Cross chapters assistance is given to those who suffer in thousands of smaller catastrophes. The unusually serious disasters of the past two years, the increasing requirements of the essential Blood Program and the continuing need of Americans for first aid and water safety training--all add up to a difficult and costly job for the Red Cross.
Overseas and within the Federal establishment in this country the Red Cross participates in the Combined Federal Campaign but about half of the 3350 Red Cross chapters conduct independent March Campaigns. All Chapters use the month of March for educational campaigns to inform the public and to recruit blood donors and volunteers.
Therefore, March will, as always, be Red Cross Month.
As President of the United States and Honorary Chairman of the American National Red Cross, I urge all civilian employees of the Federal Government and members of the Armed Forces to support the Red Cross to the fullest extent possible consistent with the local situation.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: On the same day the President signed Proclamation 3765 "Red Cross Month, 1967" (3 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 143; 32 F.R. 1167; 3 CFR, 1967 Comp., p. 25).