Lyndon B. Johnson
January 07, 1968

Remarks of Welcome in San Antonio to Prime Minister Eshkol of Israel.
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Eshkol, Mr. Secretary of State, my dear friends:
Shalom. The traditional greeting of Israel has very special meaning for all of us who have come here today.
We meet here in peace, and we will talk in peace.
And we will try to extend the peace that is in our hearts--extend it to all men who are willing to share our partnership of good faith and good purpose.
Mr. Prime Minister, we will be together for only 2 short days. But they will be long days full of friendship and full of happiness because you have come here to be with us.
These, too, will be hopeful days, because this land was born in that spirit--that spirit of promise and opportunity.
Here in this land our neighbors work hand in hand for the common good.
So, Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Eshkol, we extend to you this afternoon the hand of welcome to this land. We hope its spirit refreshes you after the long journey that you have taken.
I know that its hospitality will lift your heart.
Mr. Prime Minister, we hope that you find that peace which all Americans are proud to seek with you.

We are delighted to have you, sir.
[At this point Prime Minister Levi Eshkol responded briefly (see note). The President then resumed speaking.]
I know you people would want to meet Mrs. Eshkol and Mrs. Johnson.
Mr. Mayor, Congressman Gonzalez, Congressman Kazen, and other distinguished public officials, all you ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls:
It is a cold afternoon, but it is a warm welcome.
We are very proud of San Antonio and south Texas for the warmth of your welcome.

Thank all of you so much.
Note: The President spoke at 3:47 p.m. at Randolph Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas, where Prime Minister Levi Eshkol was welcomed for his visit to the LBJ Ranch. Prime Minister Eshkol responded as follows:
Mr. president, Mrs. Johnson:
Mrs. Eshkol and I are very happy to be here as your guests.
Since 1964 we have with us fond memories of our first meeting. We come to you in friendship, and we know that friendship awaits us.
My central concern is peace--peace for my country and for the area of the world in which we live.
It was there in ancient days that men first expressed a striving for peace on earth.
I will not ever give up the hope that this will come to pass. We in our country are working towards this end.
And I know how much America is doing under your leadership, Mr. President, to help the cause of peace and justice in the world,
In the Biblical phrase, Shalom larachok velekarov, which means peace be to him that is far, and to him that is near.
Mr. President, it is a great pleasure to be with you.
In his opening words the President also referred to Secretary of State Dean Rusk. At the close of his remarks he referred to Mayor W. W. McAllister of San Antonio and Representatives Henry B. Gonzalez and Abraham Kazen, Jr., of Texas.
On the same day the White House released a list of the members of the welcoming committee for the Prime Minister, an announcement by the Embassy of Israel of gifts to the President and his family from Prime Minister Eshkol, and a press report by George E. Christian, Special Assistant to the President, and Loyd Hackler, Associate Press Secretary, on the Prime Minister's visit to the LBJ Ranch.