Lyndon B. Johnson
January 20, 1969

Proclamation 3889—Establishing Marble Canyon National Monument, Arizona

Whereas,the Marble Canyon of the Colorado River in Arizona, a northerly continuation of the world-renowned Grand Canyon, possesses unusual geologic and paleontologic features and objects and other scientific and natural values; and
Whereas,it appears that the public interest would be promoted by reserving the federally owned lands encompassing Marble Canyon in order to permanently protect such features and objects; and
Whereas,the Advisory Board on National Parks, Historic Sites, Buildings and Monuments, in April 1967, endorsed the preservation and protection of Marble Canyon as a part of the National Park System; and
Whereas,under section 2 of the act of June 8, 1906 (34 Stat. 225, 16 U.S.C. 431), the President is authorized "to declare by public proclamation * * * objects of historic or scientific interest that are situated upon the lands owned or controlled by the Government of the United States to be national monuments, and may reserve as a part thereof parcels of land, the limits of which in all cases shall be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States, under the authority vested in me by section 2 of the act of June 8, 1906, supra, by the act of June 29, 1906 (34 Stat. 607, 16 U.S.C. 684), and by the act of June 4, 1897 (30 Stat. 34, 16 U.S.C. 473), do proclaim that, subject to valid existing rights, (1) federally owned or controlled lands within the exterior boundaries of the following described area are hereby reserved from all forms of appropriation under the public land laws and set apart as the Marble Canyon National Monument and (2) State-owned lands within those boundaries shall become and be reserved as parts of that monument upon acquisition of title thereto by the United States:
GILA AND SALT RIVER MERIDIAN, ARIZONA
Beginning at a point in the NE ANE of sec. 29, T. 34 N., R. 5 E., unsurveyed, said point begin the intersection of the boundary of the Grand Canyon National Park and the west rim line of Marble Canyon;
Thence in a generally northerly direction along the rims of Marble Canyon, Saddle Canyon, Buck Farm Canyon, South Canyon and Bedrock Canyon, to a point on the south line of sec. 18, T. 36 N., R. 5 E.;
Thence easterly along the south lines of secs. 18 and 17 to a point on the south line of sec. 17, 500' north of the rim of Bedrock Canyon and approximately 725' west of the south quarter corner of said sec. 17;
Thence in a generally northerly direction parallel to and 500' from the rims of Bedrock Canyon, Marble Canyon and North Canyon, to a point where the monument boundary intersects the east line of sec. 18, T. 37 N., R 6 E., approximately 500' south of the NE corner thereof;
Thence northerly along the east lines of secs. 18 and 7 to a point on the east line of said sec. 7, 500' north of the rim of North Canyon and approximately 935' south of the east quarter corner thereof;
Thence in a generally northerly direction parallel to and 500' above the rims of North Canyon, Marble Canyon and Rider Canyon to a point where the monument boundary intersects the east line of sec. 28, T. 38 N., R. 6 E.;
Thence northerly along the east lines of secs. 28 and 21 to a point on the east line of said sec. 21, 500' north of the rim of Rider Canyon and approximately 200' south of the east quarter corner thereof;
Thence in a generally northerly direction parallel to and 500' above the rims of Rider Canyon and Marble Canyon to a point where the monument boundary intersects the north south center line of sec. 36, T. 39 N., R. 6 E., approximately 300' north of the south quarter corner thereof;
Thence northerly along the north south center line of sec. 36 to the quarter corner common to secs. 36 and 25;
Thence easterly along the south line of sec. 25 to the SE corner thereof;
Thence northerly along the east line of sec. 25 to a point 500' north of the rim of Marble Canyon, said point being approximately 260' north of the SE corner thereof;
Thence in a generally northerly direction parallel to and 500' above the rims of Marble Canyon and Badger Canyon to a point where the monument boundary intersects the west line of sec. 17, T. 39 N., R. 7 E., approximately 1200' south of the west quarter corner thereof;
Thence northerly along the west line of sec. 17 to a point 500' north of the rim of Badger Canyon, said point being approximately 830' north of the west quarter corner thereof;
Thence in a generally northerly direction parallel to and 500' above the rims of Badger Canyon, Marble Canyon and an unnamed canyon to a point where the monument boundary intersects the north south center line of sec. 9, approximately 500' south of the north quarterly corner thereof;
Thence northerly along the north south center line of secs. 9 and 4 to a point 500' north of the rim of the aforesaid unnamed canyon, said point being approximately 830' north of the south quarter corner thereof;
Thence in a generally northerly direction parallel to and 500' above the rims of the aforesaid unnamed canyon and Marble Canyon to a point where the monument boundary intersects the east line of sec. 4 approximately at the east quarter corner of said sec. 4;
Thence northerly along the east line of sec. 4 to the SE corner of the NE 'ANEA thereof;
Thence easterly along the south line of the NW ANWV4 of sec. 3 to the SE corner thereof;
Thence northerly along the east line of the NW ANW'A of sec. 3 to the NE corner thereof;
Thence easterly along the north line of T39N, R7E, to its intersection with the western boundary of the Navajo Indian Reservation as prescribed by the act of June 14, 1934 (48 Stat. 960).
Thence in a generally southerly direction along the western boundary of the Navajo Indian Reservation (which is described by the act of June 14, 1934, as the south bank of the Colorado River to its confluence with the Little Colorado River, excluding from the reservation all lands designated by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to section 28 of the Arizona Enabling Act of June 20, 1910 (36 Stat. 575), as being valuable for water-power purposes and all lands withdrawn or classified as power site lands), to its intersection with the eastward extension of the boundary line of the Grand Canyon National Park in the SW SWA of sec. 27, T34N, R5E, unsurveyed;
Thence westerly along the said eastward extension of the boundary line and the existing boundary of the Grand Canyon National Park to the Point of Beginning, containing approximately 26,080 acres.
The easterly boundary of the monument shall be conterminous with the westerly boundary of the Navajo Indian Reservation.
Any of the above-described lands which lie within the boundaries of the Kaibab National Forest, Arizona, as are by this proclamation included within the monument are hereby excluded and eliminated from the Kaibab National Forest and the boundaries of that national forest are revised accordingly.
Such parts of the Grand Canyon National Game Preserve, designated under authority of the act of June 29, 1906, supra, as are by this proclamation included within the monument are hereby excluded and eliminated from the Game Preserve.
Any reservations or withdrawals heretofore made which affect the lands described above are hereby revoked; however, the easternmost limits of the lands within such reservations and withdrawals shall be the easterly boundary of the monument.
Warning is hereby expressly given to all unauthorized persons not to appropriate, injure, destroy, or remove any feature of this monument and not to locate or settle upon any of the lands thereof.
The national monument hereby established shall be administered pursuant to the act of August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535, 16 U.S.C. 1, 2-4), and acts supplementary thereto or amendatory thereof.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand this twentieth day of January in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-nine and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety third.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON