Lyndon B. Johnson
January 25, 1964

Letter to the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission on Employee-Management Relations.
Dear Mr. Chairman:
I have reviewed with interest your report on the status of the employee-management cooperation program in the federal service.
Cooperation between federal managers and employee organizations is a source of strength in the civil service. We must rely upon the creative energies of employees to help insure that personnel practices and working conditions in Government are the best that can be devised.
I believe the progress made thus far in setting up an orderly system of relationships is most encouraging. It is understandable that there will be difficult questions to be worked out and I am confident all concerned will seek fair and reasonable solution of these problems within the basic framework of Executive Order 10988.
This program is a great step forward. It is important that it continue to be put into effect in accordance with its intended purposes. We must all work together to achieve the full potential it affords for improvements in the public service. Please continue to keep me advised.
Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Honorable John W. Macy, Jr., Chairman, United States Civil Service Commission, Washington, D.C.]
Note: Mr. Macy's report, in the form of a letter dated January 17 (3 pp.. mimeographed), was released with the President's letter.
The report stated that the task of setting up new relationships between federal managers and employee organizations had not been easy for either group. "Much has been done and, on the whole, done well. There have been difficulties and some complaints. But in the main, the initial work of establishing units of representation, according recognition, training management personnel, and beginning negotiation of agreements has been completed successfully .... On the basis of this experience, I find no reason to recommend any changes at this time." The report added that employee organizations had been recognized and were dealing with management in about one-half of the federal installations throughout the country.
Executive Order 10988 was approved January 17, 1962 (3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 521).