Lyndon B. Johnson
January 07, 1969

Remarks to Reporters Following a Meeting With the Joint Congressional Leadership
Ladies and gentlemen:
We met with the Democratic leadership at breakfast yesterday morning, in accordance with our practice through the years. We have met with the joint leadership of the Congress this afternoon. We asked Mr. Mills and Mr. Byrnes to join us because of their expertise in the field of budget and economic matters, because not only the State of the Union but the Budget and Economic Messages are due to go to Congress as soon as they are ready to receive them. They are organizing their committees now and electing their members.
We reviewed this afternoon the budget for this year as we see it. We discussed the probability of next year, upon which we have reached no final decision as yet, both with regard to expenditures and revenue. We talked generally about how the messages would be delivered and when.
The membership here will give some thought to questions I raised with them, and they have made some suggestions to me which will very likely be reflected in the messages when they are delivered.
I think that accurately reflects what happened.
Speaker McCormack or Senator Dirksen or Senator Mansfield or Mr. Ford or any of the rest of you, Mr. Mills or Mr. Byrnes, if you have anything to add, we will be glad to have you say it.
SENATOR MANSFIELD. I think you have covered it all, Mr. President. Thank you.
Note: The President spoke with reporters at 4:07 p.m. in his office at the White House. During his remarks he referred to Representative Wilbur D. Mills of Arkansas, Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Representative John W. Byrnes of Wisconsin, ranking Republican member of the committee, Representative John W. McCormack of Massachusetts, Speaker of the House of Representatives, Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen of Illinois, Senate Minority Leader, Senator Mike Mansfield of Montana, Senate Majority Leader, and Representative Gerald R. Ford of Michigan, House Minority Leader.
As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.