Lyndon B. Johnson
January 03, 1964

Executive Order 11136—Establishing the President's Committee on Consumer Interstate and the Consumer Advisory Council
WHEREAS all individuals in our society, as consumers, are significantly affected by Federal economic policies and by Federal programs to promote the welfare of consumers and to protect their interests in the marketplace; and
WHEREAS individual consumers and consumer organizations face unusual problems in attempting to assure that the views and needs of consumers receive full consideration by Federal officials who administer policies and programs affecting consumer interests; and
WHEREAS the Federal Government, serving all the people, has a special obligation to be alert to consumer needs and to advance the interest of consumers by all appropriate means, including arrangements to enable representatives of consumers to be heard in the development and administration of Federal policies and programs:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment of Committee. (a) There is hereby established the President's Committee on Consumer Interests (hereinafter referred to as the "Committee").
(b) The Committee shall be composed of representatives of the Attorney General, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Housing and Home Finance Administrator, the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers; such other Government officials or employees as the President may designate; and such private citizens especially qualified to represent consumer interests as the President may appoint. Each Federal agency head named herein shall designate one person, who shall be an assistant secretary or official of comparable rank, to represent him on the Committee.
(c) The Chairman of the Committee shall be designated by the President from among the Federal members to serve for such term as the President may determine. The Chairman shall direct and supervise any staff employed by or detailed to the Committee.
(d) The Chairman shall invite the heads of Federal agencies not represented on the Committee to designate representatives (who shall be assistant secretaries or officials of comparable rank) to participate as ad hoc members of the Committee when matters affecting the responsibilities of their respective agencies are to be considered by the Committee.
Sec. 2. Establishment of the Consumer Advisory Council. (a) There is hereby established the Consumer Advisory Council (hereinafter referred to as the Council), which shall consist of the private citizens appointed by the President as members of the Committee. The President shall designate the Chairman of the Council from among its members.
(b) The Chairman of the Committee shall be responsible for assuring that the meetings and other activities of the Council are carried out in accordance with the relevant provisions of Executive Order 11007 of February 26, 1962, and for prescribing such additional regulations with respect to the affairs of the Council as may be necessary.
Sec. 3. Functions of the Committee, the Federal members, and the Council. (a) The Committee shall from time to time consider (1) the Federal policies and programs of primary importance to consumers or the unmet consumer needs which can appropriately be met through Federal action, either under existing laws or new legislation; (2) the aspects of Federal policies, programs, and operations concerning which the views of consumers should be available to Federal officials;
(3) the means by which necessary liaison may be established between the Consumer Advisory Council and consumer organizations to enable the Council to perform its functions under subsection (c), below; and
(4) the manner in which consumer views can be communicated to appropriate Federal departments and agencies.
(b) The Federal agency heads enumerated in section 1(b), collectively or individually, as appropriate, (1) shall seek the advice of the Committee or the Council on matters affecting consumers, and similarly receive recommendations made on the initiative of the Committee or the Council; (2) shall be responsible for considering recommendations made by the Committee or the Council; and (3) shall take such action as is deemed to be in the general public interest, including making recommendations to the President on matters requiring action by him or by the Congress.
(c) The Council shall advise the Government on issues of broad economic policy of immediate concern to consumers, on governmental programs to meet consumer needs or to protect consumer interests, and on needed improvements in the flow of consumer research material to the public. The Council may arrange through the Chairman of the Committee for fact-finding studies to enable the Council to carry out its responsibilities. In carrying out its functions the Council shall, insofar as practicable, provide interested organizations and individuals an opportunity to present their views and recommendations to the Council for its consideration.
Sec. 4. Federal agencies. (a) Upon request of the Chairman of the Committee, the heads of Federal agencies shall so far as practicable provide the Committee with information and reports relating to matters within the cognizance of the Committee.
(b) Each Federal agency represented on the Committee shall furnish necessary assistance to the Committee in accordance with section 214 of the Act of May 3, 1945, 59 Stat. 134 (31 U.S.C. 691).
(c) The General Services Administration is hereby designated as the agency which shall provide administrative services for the Committee on a reimbursable basis.
Sec. 5. Compensation and per diem. For each day any person appointed from private life as a member of the Committee is engaged in meetings, or is with the approval of the Chairman of the Committee engaged in other work in pursuance of this order, such person shall receive compensation at a rate determined by the Chairman of the Committee and travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 55a; 5 U.S.C. 73b-2) for persons in the Government service employed intermittently.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House,
January 3, 1964.