Lyndon B. Johnson
January 17, 1969

Message to the Congress Transmitting the First Annual Report of the Secretary of Transportation.
To the Congress of the United States:

I transmit herewith the first annual report of the Secretary of Transportation.
The importance of transportation to the economy, security and welfare of each American makes this report an important document which deserves careful reading.
In his report, the Secretary of Transportation reviews the state of the transportation system of the United States and described the initial efforts of the Department to aid in the improvement and development of the system.
Secretary Boyd has made gratifying progress in organizing the new Department, and has assembled a fine team to help him confront the many challenges arising out of the mission assigned the Department of Transportation by the Congress in Public Law 89-670.
The Department, during the period of the report, carried out its direct services to the public through five operating administrations, each headed by an Administrator reporting directly to the Secretary. The Department has five Assistant Secretaries, four of whom have substantive responsibilities, with one Assistant Secretary in charge of Administration. In addition, the Department has a General Counsel responsible for legal affairs.
As a result of the efforts of the Secretary and his staff, the Department reports a number of achievements during the three months in which it was in operation during fiscal year 1967. These achievements are set forth in the pages of the report, but I invite your attention especially to these:
A special effort was made to foster safety in transportation since the Coast Guard, the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Highway Administration, and the Federal Railroad Administration all have significant responsibilities in the field of safety. New programs in highway and automobile safety were successfully supported by the Department.
Both the Coast Guard and the Federal Aviation Administration have made important contributions to the Vietnam war effort. They have supplied skilled men and needed equipment in support of the efforts of our other forces.
Development work continues to improve the safety capacity of the nation's airways. New techniques and equipment have been developed and in many instances are in the process of installation.
A new approach has been adopted for the planning of Federally supported highways, especially in cities, with a view to assuring that highways reflect design features and routings conducive to sound urban development as well as improved transportation.
New regulations have been developed and issued concerning safety features on automobiles, and work has been initiated to help States and communities establish highway safety programs.
The National System of Defense and Interstate Highways continued to receive Federal assistance, and tangible progress was made toward completion of the Interstate System as authorized by the Congress.
Both the National Motor Vehicle Safety Advisory Council and the National Highway Safety Advisory Committee began their operations.
Progress continued in the development of high speed passenger trains in spite of many technical and management problems.
A new record was set for tonnage transiting the Saint Lawrence Seaway, the United States portion of which is operated and maintained by the Department.
By these achievements in improving our national transportation system, I am pleased to report that the Transportation Department has shown a deep concern for the needs of the traveler and the shipper.
The Department has also moved to advance the welfare of our citizens by making certain that transportation is provided with due regard to its impact on our environment: land, air and water.
I commend these accomplishments and the enclosed report to your attention.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

January 17, 1969