Lyndon B. Johnson
July 18, 1968

Proclamation 3859—Salute to Eisenhower Week

Few men in history have contributed as much to their country and to the world as has General Dwight David Eisenhower.
As Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces in World War II, his leadership, resolution, and personal courage guided us to victory and to peace.
Following World War II, he served as the first Supreme Allied Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces in Europe, and demonstrated an unrivaled capacity to create a united military organization.
During eight years as President of the United States, he enhanced his reputation as a leader of nations; a program of lasting international cooperation was inaugurated in his administration.
General Eisenhower is recognized as one of the most popular and respected living Americans--admired and loved by his fellowmen not only as an outstanding military leader and statesman, but also as one whose character and high principles serve as a standard for all citizens.
It is fitting that on the occasion of General Eisenhower's 78th birthday on October 14, 1968, we pay tribute to this great American. To this end, the Congress, by a joint resolution approved July 18, 1968, has requested the President to designate the week of October 13, 1968, as Salute to Eisenhower Week. It is my pleasure to do so.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the week of October 13, 1968, as Salute to Eisenhower Week, and I call upon the people of the United States to observe that week with appropriate ceremonies and activities.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand this eighteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixtyeight, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-third.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: For remarks of the President upon presenting the proclamation to John Eisenhower, son of the former President, see Item 488.
The proclamation was released at Honolulu, Hawaii.