Lyndon B. Johnson
July 18, 1966

Statement by the President on the Peace Corps' School-to-School Program.
THE PEACE CORPS' school-to-school program deserves the attention and support of every American.
It is a program unique in Government because it allows individuals--particularly American youth--to directly participate in solving a major world problem at its most meaningful level--on a people-to-people basis.
Already young American students have raised funds to construct 150 such schools in rural areas in 24 countries, and another 300 groups are currently raising funds to continue the program. The goal for this fiscal year, 1967, is 1,000 schools.
In a world where four out of ten persons still cannot read or write, such schools may well be the most important structures along the road to peace.
Note: The President's statement was made Public as part of a White House release which included several attachments as follows: (1) a letter to Wally Allen, Special Assistant in the school-to-school project, from Jim Nevins of Coming East High School in Corning, N.Y., transmitting his students' contribution of $900 and explaining the means by which they earned the money; (2) a fact sheet on the activities of participating schools, including a list of countries aided and of States with schools taking part in the program; and (3) an of the role of the Exchange Peace Corps, a program which would bring volunteers from other for service in the United States. The text of three attachments is published in the Weekly compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 2, p. 949)
On the same day the White House made public the highlights of a personal report on Peace Corps activities made to the President by Jack Hood Vaughn, Director of the Peace Corps, along with a table showing (as of July 18) the number of Peace Corps Volunteers and the countries to which they were assigned. The text of the report summary and table is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 2, p. 948).