Lyndon B. Johnson
July 10, 1968

Statement by the President Following Senate Committee Approval of the Housing Appropriations Bill.
THE Senate Appropriations Committee has signaled a message of hope to the American city.
That message came a few moments ago, in the $3.1 billion fiscal 1969 housing appropriations bill, the largest in the Nation's history and just below the amounts requested in my January budget.
It tells the slum child that $1 billion for Model Cities can replace blight with decent neighborhoods.
It tells the poor father that the dream of decent shelter for his family can become a reality, with $65 million in rent supplements.
It tells the returning Negro or Mexican-American serviceman who seeks access to a good home that sufficient funds are available to support the new fair housing program in the 1968 Civil Rights Act.
It tells the city resident that the new urban renewal--$1.3 billion--can restore and revitalize decaying neighborhoods.
It tells every American that we can meet the crises of the city if we act decisively and responsibly.
The $3.1 billion program approved by the Senate committee compares with $900 million made available by Congress for comparable activities in 1964 and $500 million for 1960.
I applaud the action of the Senate Appropriations Committee and I urge the Senate and the House of Representatives to adopt its recommendations.
There are many programs vitally needed by our people that require congressional action: higher education, poverty appropriations, gun control, the major housing program I recommended in February, which is on the House floor today, health manpower legislation, major conservation bills such as scenic trails, scenic rivers, the redwoods, and a variety of consumer measures such as the pipeline safety, the Wholesome Poultry Act, the Hazardous Radiation Act, occupational health and safety legislation, and mutual fund reform, and many others.
I urge the Congress to act as promptly as possible on this legislation. Even though the session may have to be resumed after interruptions for political conventions, it is critical that this legislation be enacted and that the Congress return to complete the unfinished agenda for all the people before this session is ended.
Note: The Independent Offices and Department of Housing and Urban Development Appropriation Act of 1969 was approved on October 4, 1968, as Public Law 90-550 (82 Stat. 937).