Lyndon B. Johnson
July 26, 1968

Presidential Unit Citation Awarded the 9th Company, 3d Battalion, 1st Cavalry Regiment, Capital Republic of Korea Infantry Division, Republic of Korea Army
BY VIRTUE of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States I have today awarded
THE PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION (ARMY) FOR EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM TO 9TH COMPANY, 1ST CAVALRY REGIMENT REPUBLIC OF KOREA ARMY
The 9th Company distinguished itself by extraordinary heroism and outstanding military professionalism while defending Landing Zone Twenty-Seven Victor, Pleiku Province, Republic of Vietnam, during the night of 9-10 August 1966. About one hour before midnight the sounds of digging were heard outside the perimeter. The suspicious area was illuminated by a searchlight and reconnoitered by machine gun fire from one of the United States Army tanks under the operational control of the 9th Company. This action triggered the first of a series of violent attacks made against the perimeter by a North Vietnamese Army battalion and reinforced by heavy fire from recoilless rifles, mortars, and rockets. During the next six hours, the foe made repeated assaults from differing directions, only to be beaten back by the coordinated fire from the stalwart defenders. A single enemy managed to penetrate into the position, but this danger was quickly eliminated by a Korean soldier wielding a bayonet. Throughout this long battle the 9th Company held its position and exhibited great gallantry under intense fire and repeated ground attacks. The tenacious defense and subsequent mop up of the battlefield virtually eliminated the enemy battalion as an effective fighting unit. The heavy losses inflicted upon the numerically superior enemy force attest to the physical courage, determination, and skill of the defenders. The close coordination and mutual cooperation between the Republic of Korea and the United States forces resulted in a fighting team undaunted by the enemy onslaught. The heroic conduct of the 9th Company was in keeping with the highest traditions of the Republic of Korea Army.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON