Lyndon B. Johnson
July 07, 1966

Statement by the President on the Breakdown of Negotiations in the Airlines Strike.
I HAVE just been informed of the breakdown in negotiations between the five airline carriers--Eastern, National, Northwest, Trans-World, and United Airlines--and the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, and the decision of the union to strike the carriers.
The serious implications of this dispute make it imperative that the parties try to reach a prompt settlement. At my request, Assistant Secretary of Labor Reynolds will get in touch with the 'parties immediately and reconvene them as soon as possible. I am sure that all the American people share my deep concern over this matter and the convictions that the parties must do everything within their powers to bring about a settlement promptly.
I am disappointed by the failure of the parties to reach agreement and by the decision of the union to strike.
I am particularly concerned that our essential military needs be met, that the important space work at Cape Kennedy be continued, that the inconvenience to the traveling public be held to a minimum, and that mail deliveries continue with the least interference possible.
I have asked Acting Secretary of Defense Cyrus Vance to make certain that all military requirements for air transport are fully met and to report to me immediately if any problems arise.
I have requested Chairman Charles Murphy and the Civil Aeronautics Board to take all appropriate action to provide needed airline services with the air carriers remaining in operation.
I have directed General William McKee, the Federal Aviation Administrator, to cooperate in every way possible with the Civil Aeronautics Board.
I have requested Chairman john Bush and the Interstate Commerce Commission to take all appropriate action to provide the maximum available rail and bus transportation to minimize the inconvenience to the traveling public.
I have instructed Postmaster General Lawrence O'Brien to use every available mode of transportation to move the mails as rapidly as possible, particularly to our servicemen in Vietnam, and reduce to a minimum any delays in mail delivery.
On April 21, I established an Emergency Board under the Railway Labor Act to investigate this dispute and to make findings of fact and recommendations. The Board was composed of Senator Wayne Morse, David Ginsburg, a distinguished Washington attorney, and Richard Neustadt of Harvard University. When the Board reported to me on June 7, I transmitted the report to the parties with my strong recommendation that they settle their differences within its framework. At that time, I expressed my belief and the belief of my advisers that the Board's recommendations formed "the framework for a just and prompt settlement, which is in the national interest." On June 13, the carriers informed me that they accepted the recommendations of the Emergency Board. Since that time, Secretary of Labor Willard Wirtz and Assistant Secretary of Labor James Reynolds have been working with the carriers and the union to bring the dispute to a conclusion without a strike and with a fair and just settlement for both parties.
I have done everything within my power and have taken every action available to the Federal Government to minimize the inconvenience to the public resulting from the strike but the basic responsibility to the public rests with the union and the carriers.
They have a great responsibility to the traveling public, and the public will expect them to live up to that responsibility.
Note: On April 21, the President issued Executive Order 11276 "Creating an Emergency Board to Investigate Disputes Between the Carriers Represented by the Five Carriers Negotiating Committee and Certain of Their Employees" (2 Weekly Comp. Pros. Docs., p. 557; 31 F.R. 6233; 3 CFR, 1966 Comp., p. 106).
For the President's remarks on June 7, 1966, in response to the Emergency Board's report on the airlines labor dispute, see Item 256. See also Item 360.
The statement was released at San Antonio, Texas.