Lyndon B. Johnson
July 08, 1967

Statements by the President on Federal Assistance Programs for College Students.
STATEMENT CONCERNING REPORT ON THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS ASSISTED
These figures are dramatic evidence of the desire and ability of this country to help its young people attain their aspirations. The statistics suggest that in only one generation we can attain a once impossible goal: that every American boy and girl will have the opportunity to move up the educational ladder as far as individual desire and ability permit.
STATEMENT ON THE TALENT SEARCH PROGRAM
There is no telling how many thousands of young people, now and in the future, will be reached and rescued by this program. But we do know that thousands are in college right now as a result of it.
If every American would keep an eye out for the boy next door, or the girl down the road, more of our Nation's talent would be uncovered and developed.
Note: The President's statements were made public as part of a White House release announcing that at least 900,000 young people had received help from four federally-supported programs during the 1966-67 school year. The announcement, based on a report to the President by Secretary Gardner, added that it was estimated that 1,175,000 undergraduate and graduate students would be aided in the next academic year.
The release listed the four programs, as follows: the Educational Opportunity Grants program under which outright grants--matched by the colleges-are made to needy students; the College Work-Study program whereby students work 15 hours a week; the National Defense Student Loan program which provides loans to students at low interest rates; and the Guaranteed Loan program under which loans from private commercial sources are guaranteed by the Government.
The release also stated that the President had called attention to the Talent Search program which began in 1966. Under this program the Office of Education, working with the colleges and universities, departments of education, and organizations of social concern, was conducting a nationwide search for talented young people, telling them of new opportunities for higher education and training, and of the larger role they could play in the American future.
A summary of the report, including statistics on the various programs, is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 3, p. 998).
The statements were released at San Antonio, Texas.