Lyndon B. Johnson
June 17, 1965

Remarks at a Ceremony in the State Department Auditorium in Honor of the Gemini 4 Astronauts.
Mr. Secretary, Your Excellencies, astronauts, Mr. Mathews, Mr. Webb:
I am happy to be able to join with the Vice President here this evening to participate in this ceremony, to enjoy the film that we have just seen, to pay our respects to the astronauts, and to meet all of our visitors.
I am seldom accused of being at a loss for words. But I am sure all of you agree that there are no words that are really adequate to describe what we have just seen on that screen.
I should like to say to you gentlemen, that if I had seen your films before I saw you last week in Houston I might have made you full colonels.
It is so unusually fitting that we could view these films tonight here in the company of our diplomats and their families, including their young children, from every corner of the globe.
In 1958, when I presented this country's space proposals to the United Nations, I said then that we of America are determined that our quarrels and divisions here on this earth shall not be carried into this new and this very peaceful domain of space.
And sitting here watching this film, it struck me again how imperative it is. Colonel McDivitt and Colonel White were soaring 100 miles from this planet. And from that perspective, when the sun shines in all of its purity, how small, how meaningless seem the differences among men and among nations down below.
Surely, we on this earth, the heads of state, the diplomats, and the private citizens, can some way find it within ourselves to search for, and to reach for, those new perspectives which will enable us to understand one another a little better, and assure peace among the peoples of the world forever.
We of the United States are quite proud of this accomplishment by these fine young men, and by all who are part of our space exploration team.
But I would say to you tonight, from all the nations of earth, that pride is not what motivates us, and pride is not the end that we seek. We of America are motivated in these efforts to extend the human frontiers by the desires in our hearts for peace--and peace is the end that we seek in everything that we do.
I have said it before. I want to say it again. The world has no need for arms races or for moon races. What we ask and what we want is for all peoples in all lands-East and West--to pull back the curtains, to come through the walls, to join hands in common cause, and to take a great walk together towards peace on this earth.
And may I say to you, Colonel McDivitt, and to you, Colonel White, and you, Mr. Mathews, and you, Mr. Webb, that this may not make me too popular with your families. But I am going to ask you tonight-in the very next few hours--to take the Presidential plane and travel outside this country again.
Many peoples in many lands are thrilled, as we are thrilled, by what you have done. And as the details can be worked out, I want you to join our delegation in Paris at the Paris Air Show, and go out among the friendly peoples of earth to share with them the excitement and the thrills of your experience.
Always, we have meant for America's successes to be shared by all mankind, and we welcome the opportunity for all mankind to know you, and to see you, and to understand from you that our mission--and our only mission--is peace.
And the highest ranking official of this Government other than the man speaking to you, the distinguished Vice President is an apostle of peace. He has preached it in the Congress and in the world wherever he has gone. And I am going to ask him to have Mrs. Humphrey join you as an escort, and as a leader, and as a symbol of the Government of the United States, in the next few hours if you are ready. You won't travel quite as fast or nearly so far, but I hope you will enjoy your mission.
Note: The President spoke at 9:10 p.m. in the Department of State Auditorium. In his opening words he referred to Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, the Ambassadors and heads of missions from foreign countries, Lt. Col. James A. McDivitt and Lt. Col. Edwin H. White 2d, Gemini 4 astronauts, Charles W. Mathews, manager of the Gemini space flight program, and James E. Webb, Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
On June 18 the astronauts and their wives left for Paris, accompanied by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey and Mr. Webb.
See also Items 304, 310, 318.