Lyndon B. Johnson
June 25, 1964

Remarks on the Proposed Redwoods National Park in Northern California.
I HAVE MET today with Secretary Udall and conservation leaders from both Congress and private life, with our distinguished and beloved Chief Justice to express my own personal concern over the future of the great redwood forests in California.
The redwoods are one of Nature's masterpieces in North America--and in the world. Yet, at the present rate of logging and with destruction resulting from inadequate conservation practices, the future of the redwoods is in doubt.
Once there were 2 million acres of virgin coast redwoods reaching from Point Sur to Southern Oregon. Today only about 15 percent remains uncut. Only about 2 1/2 percent have some degree of permanent protection. The current rate of logging will cut nearly all the old growth within the next 5 decades.
Here is a picture taken by National Geographic which shows the beauty of that countryside there where the redwoods still remain far removed from any noise and transportation or highways, and it is hoped that some of that area can be acquired for national park purposes.
Many of the standing redwood forests are in jeopardy from flooding and fire and plans for highway construction. More than 500 redwoods were lost in 1 year.
Last year the National Geographic Society discovered in a secluded grove of coast redwoods the world's three tallest trees-the tallest standing 367 feet. Here is a picture of it back here.
Now a preliminary report from the National Park Service and the National Geographic Society indicates there remains a last chance opportunity for the United States. This Nation can protect these redwoods by creating a great and unique national park in one area of Northern California. I have directed Secretary Udall to prepare a plan for a redwoods national park and to have it ready for presentation to the Congress next January.
I have expressed my concern and determination to save our countrysides. I know of no better place to begin than in this work of saving the majestic redwood forests of the American West.
I would especially like to commend the National Geographic Society and the Sierra Club, the Save the Redwoods League and other such fine organizations for the unselfish efforts they have made in this work. Secretary Udall will direct the Park Service to proceed with their study and will report back to the President at the beginning of the year. And, assuming that report is a favorable one, we will give serious consideration to making the appropriation recommendations to Congress in the next session.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke in the Cabinet Room at the White House. In his opening remarks he referred to Stewart L. Udall, Secretary of the Interior, and Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United States.