Lyndon B. Johnson
June 26, 1968

Statement by the President Urging House Action on the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Bill.
TODAY the House of Representatives has an opportunity to prevent tragedy before it strikes and to protect every American family against the threat of danger and destruction.
That protection can be provided in the form of a strong natural gas pipeline safety bill, which I recommended in a special consumer message 16 months ago. The Senate has already enacted a measure encompassing my recommendations.

More than 800,000 miles of pipeline crisscross the continent reaching into virtually every city and town in the Nation. Many lines run under our homes and crowded city streets. Many other lines will rest under communities of the future as our population grows and shifts.
Lives and property have already been lost in terrible explosions, ignited by gas pipeline failures, such as those in Natchitoches, La., and in Jamaica, N.Y. And we know that the potential for even greater tragedy lurks in pipelines lowered into place almost half a century ago.
I urge the House, as it meets today, to enact a measure conforming to the Senate bill, and to make these points clear:

--that existing as well as new pipelines will be covered by the law,

--that Federal minimum safety standards and enforcement regulations will go into effect within 2 years--and interim standards at once--unless the States can show that their procedures are at least equal to Federal procedures,

--that Federal grants to develop modern and workable safety standards will be made available to the States without delay.
This 90th Congress has served the American consumer well. It has provided landmark protection in the truth-in-lending, wholesome meat, flammable fabrics, product safety, and fire safety laws. Now the House has the opportunity--and the obligation---to extend and enlarge that record by writing into law a strong and effective natural gas pipeline safety bill.
Note: The Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 was approved by the President on August 12, 1968. (see Item 441 ).
For the President's special consumer message of February 16, 1967, see 1967 volume, this series, Book I, Item 57.