Lyndon B. Johnson
June 07, 1966

Remarks in Response to Emergency Board Report on the Airlines Labor Dispute.
FIVE WEEKS ago I appointed an emergency board to investigate the dispute between five major domestic airlines and the union. That board has now submitted its report to me.
The dispute between the airline companies and the union threatens to cripple the vital flow of people and products across America. These airlines fly 6 out of every 10 domestic passenger miles. Over 35,000 airline employees are involved--from mechanics to flight deck personnel.
The issues are complex and important. Eight national issues involved all of the companies; 40 local issues involved four of the companies. The recommendations of the board reflect the highest order of judgment, imagination, and wisdom.
I appreciate the work that this board has done. Its three members--Senator Wayne Morse of Oregon, Professor Richard Neustadt of Harvard University, and David Ginsburg, a Washington attorney--have unselfishly taken time from their busy lives to devote to this case.
Together, these men worked many long days patiently gathering and analyzing the evidence. They heard testimony from all of the parties--presented with great conviction and skill. A record of almost 2,000 pages has been compiled. On this record, this independent and able board arrived at its recommendations.
Those recommendations form the framework for a just and prompt settlement, which is in the national interest.
Without such a settlement, there would be a disruption of the movement of men and materials needed to support our commitments to freedom's cause throughout the world. Hundreds of thousands of citizens who depend on rapid, convenient airline service will have to go without it.
I do not believe that either labor or management wants this.
Ever since the day I became President, I have asked labor and management to work together with me to improve the lives of every American. They have responded to this call. Today, they have another opportunity-and obligation--to show the Nation the progress that can come from mutual trust and cooperation.
Note: The President spoke at 5:40 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House.
The 67-page report presented the board's findings in its investigation of disputes between Eastern Airlines, Inc., National Airlines, Inc., Northwest Airlines, Inc., Trans World Airlines, Inc., and United Air Lines, Inc., and their employees represented by the International Association of Machinists (NMB Case No. A-7655).
The board was established by Executive Order 11276 of April 21, 1966 (2 Weekly Comp. Pres. Does. p. 557; 31 F.R. 6233; 3 CFR, 1966 Comp., p. 106).
See also Items 322, 360.