Lyndon B. Johnson
June 14, 1965

Executive Order 11229—Participation in the International Coffee Organization
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution of the United States of America, the International Coffee Agreement Act of 1965 (Public Law 89-23, approved May 22, 1965, hereinafter referred to as the Act), the International Coffee Agreement, 1962, ratified December 20, 1963, and proclaimed January 17, 1964 (TIAS 5505, hereinafter referred to as the Agreement), and Section 301 of Title 3 of the United States Code, and as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
Section 1. Secretary of State. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the powers of the President involved in the participation of the United States of America in the Agreement, including so much of the functions conferred upon the President by the Act as is neither reserved nor delegated to other officers herein, are hereby delegated to the Secretary of State.
Sec. 2. Secretary of the Treasury. The functions conferred upon the President by subsections (1) and (2) of Section 2 of the Act, together with the authority to issue and enforce such rules and regulations as may be necessary to perform such functions, are hereby delegated to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Sec. 3. Secretaries of State, the Treasury, Agriculture, Commerce and Labor. The functions conferred upon the President by subsection (3) of Section 2 of the Act, together with the authority to issue and enforce such rules and regulations as may be necessary to perform these functions, are hereby delegated to the Secretaries of State, the Treasury, Agriculture, Commerce, and Labor, severally.
Sec. 4. Functions reserved. There are hereby reserved to the President the functions conferred upon him by Sections 5 and 8, and by the first sentence of Section 4, of the Act.
Sec. 5. Coordination. The functions assigned by the provisions of this Order shall be performed under effective coordination. The measures of coordination hereunder shall include the following:
(1) In effecting and carrying out the participation of the United States of America in the Agreement, the Secretary of State shall consult with the appropriate heads of Federal agencies, including the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Secretary of Labor.
(2) The delegates under Section 3 of this Order shall use the functions delegated thereunder as they and the Secretary of State shall mutually agree.
Sec. 6. Redelegation. Each Secretary mentioned in this Order is hereby authorized to redelegate within his Department the functions hereinabove assigned to him.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House,
June 14, 1965.