Lyndon B. Johnson
June 01, 1965

Statement by the President and Letter on the Agreement on the Importation of Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Materials.
I AM releasing the text of a letter to the Vice President and Speaker of the House of Representatives urging passage of legislation to implement the Florence Agreement. This legislation would eliminate duties on imports of educational, scientific, and cultural materials.
Forty-seven countries have already carried out the Florence Agreement. Enactment of such legislation would benefit our schools and universities, science laboratories, libraries, museums, and other institutions.
Freedom of access to the knowledge and culture of other nations is the hallmark of open society. I urge prompt congressional consideration of this measure during International Cooperation Year.
A copy of my letter is being made available.
Dear Mr. Vice President: (Dear Mr. Speaker:)
The Agreement on the Importation of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Materials, commonly known as the Florence Agreement, was opened for signature at Lake Success, New York, on November 27, 1950. This Agreement is now in force in forty-seven countries.
The United States participated in the negotiation of the Florence Agreement. It was signed on behalf of the United States on June 24, 1959, and the Senate gave its advice and consent to its ratification on February 23, 1960. It now remains for the Congress to approve the legislation to permit the United States to implement this important Agreement.
The purpose of the Florence Agreement is to promote the growth of international understanding by reducing trade barriers to the flow of knowledge in all directions across all frontiers.
Enactment of the legislation would be of very material benefit to our schools and universities, science laboratories and research foundations, libraries, art galleries, museums, and institutions and organizations devoted to the welfare of the blind.
The fullest freedom of access to the knowledge and culture of other nations is the hallmark of the open society.
Passage of this legislation would be particularly timely in 1965, which has been designated as International Cooperation Year.
Accordingly, I ask the Congress to approve promptly the legislation implementing the Florence Agreement.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Honorable Hubert H. Humphrey, President of the Senate; Honorable John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House of Representatives]
Note: The text of the Agreement on the Importation of Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Materials is printed in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 41, P. 425).