Lyndon B. Johnson
June 22, 1966

Joint Statement Following Discussions With King Faisal of Saudi Arabia.
AT THE INVITATION of President Johnson, His Majesty King Faisal ibn Abdul Aziz al-Saud is paying an official visit to the United States of America. His Majesty and the distinguished members of the Saudi Arabian Government who accompanied him were warmly welcomed by the President and members of the United States Government. They subsequently met with the President and with senior members of the United States Government for a comprehensive review of problems of mutual concern to their countries and their peoples.
In these talks they noted with approval the close and cordial relations which have long existed between Saudi Arabia and the United States of America. These relations are based on mutual respect, a common belief in the basic principles of freedom, justice and human dignity and the independence and territorial integrity of all states. They reaffirmed their opposition to aggression, in any form, and their determination to continue the efforts of their two governments to promote the cause of peace with honor and dignity for all. They asserted the importance of solving international problems by peaceful means on the basis of right and justice. They supported the right of peoples to self-determination.
They reviewed the great strides that have already been made in the improvement of material and social conditions of their countries and pledged themselves anew to cooperate by all appropriate means to further the welfare of their peoples. They noted the threat posed by international Communism to the free nations of the world and their determination to guard against this threat.
His Majesty and the President particularly welcomed this opportunity to become personally acquainted. They are confident that the genuine personal esteem that marked their frank and comprehensive exchange of views will lead to heightened mutual understanding between the United States and Saudi Arabia and to a further strengthening of the bonds of cooperation between their countries and peoples.
His Majesty leaves on June 23 for New York City where he will continue his official visit to the United States.