Lyndon B. Johnson
June 07, 1968

Memorandum Directing the Development of Contingency Plans for Oil Spill Emergencies
Memorandum for Honorable Clark M. Clifford, Secretary of Defense; Honorable Stewart L. Udall, Secretary of the Interior; Honorable Alan S. Boyd, Secretary of Transportation; Honorable Donald F. Hornig, Director, Office of Science and Technology
SUBJECT:Federal Plans for Oil Spill Emergencies
The Nation's readiness for responding promptly and effectively to an oil spill along our coasts and waterways is of increasing importance. On the recommendation of the National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, I am asking you to assume special responsibilities in order to strengthen our preparedness to act in the event of such an emergency.
Federal Government responsibilities and capabilities for dealing with oil spills, to the extent now available, are divided among several departments. The Department of the Interior has legislative responsibility in the Oil Pollution Act of 1924, and recent Administration proposals for legislation would expand that authority if passed by the Congress. The Department has expertise in water pollution and protection of natural resources in general. The Department of Transportation, through the Coast Guard, has general responsibility for safety of life and property along the coast and has men and equipment available for water-borne operations in most of the coastal areas. The Army Corps of Engineers has similar capabilities in certain local areas. The Administration's legislative proposals concerning assignment of responsibilities with respect to oil pollution are pending before the Congress.
Early development of contingency plans for dealing with spills--identifying emergency actions and responsible officials--is urgent. Notwithstanding substantial Federal effort to date, more rapid progress in the development of multi-agency contingency plans is needed.
Accordingly, I am asking the Secretary of the Interior immediately to assume primary responsibility for completing at the earliest possible date multi-agency contingency plans for responding to oil spill emergencies, with the understanding that he will work closely with the Secretaries of Transportation and Defense in this effort. I shall depend on the Secretary of the Interior to draft contingency plans for each coastal region and other relevant bodies of water of the United States to me by July 31, 1968.
The Office of Science and Technology has special capabilities applicable to the oil spill problem, as well as responsibilities related to our water resources. Therefore, I am asking the Director of the Office of Science and Technology to establish an ad hoc Committee to include appropriate officials of the Executive Office of the President to cooperate with the departments and review the plans as they are being developed.
Until the completion of these plans, I am asking the Secretary of the Interior to assume primary responsibility, with due regard for the authorities and capabilities of participating agencies, for coordinating the use of appropriate Government resources for dealing with the pollution aspects of oil spills in or threatening the coastal zone or other relevant waters with the understanding that: (a) The Secretary of the Interior will immediately request the Secretary of Transportation (or the Secretary of Defense in particular local areas where more appropriate) to assume interim responsibility for on-scene operational coordination and interim control in emergencies of multi-agency actions for dealing with such incidents; and (b) The Secretary of the Interior will provide to the Secretary of Transportation (or Secretary of Defense) expert advice to the local operational commander with respect to water quality and conservation goals, protection of natural resources, the use of chemicals in clean-up activities, and the like. Non-Federal interests will be assisted in preparing for emergency actions by timely public announcement of the on-scene command official in each area.
The Departments of Defense and Transportation have important resources and capabilities for dealing with oil spill problems and protecting our natural resources from their consequences. I am consequently asking both the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation to participate fully in the development of contingency plans. Further, their readiness to assume emergency responsibilities in the interim period, as requested by the Secretary of the Interior, will be an important contribution to protecting the Nation's resources.
I personally look forward to expeditious completion of well considered plans for appropriate protection from the hazards of pollution from oil spills.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: On November 13, 1968, the President announced approval of a national contingency plan for combating oil spills (see Item 586).