Lyndon B. Johnson
June 02, 1966

Statement by the President Following the Landing of Surveyor I on the Moon.
OVERNIGHT the eyes of Surveyor I have become the eyes of the world on the moon. Another exciting chapter in the peaceful exploration of the universe is open for men to read and share.
Millions of Americans who stayed up late or got up early have already seen the remarkable pictures taken by Surveyor I on the moon this morning. Even now they are being displayed and printed around the world.
We have conducted our space program openly since the basic law creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was passed by the Congress in 1958. I am asking Mr. Webb and his colleagues to offer the best possible prints of these remarkable photographs to the world scientific community as soon as possible, as we did with the Ranger pictures from the moon and the Mariner IV pictures from Mars last summer.
We can be as proud of the openness of our space program as we are of its successes.
And I assure you that we are particularly proud today that Surveyor performed so well on its very first test flight.
The odds against achieving full success in such a difficult mission on the first flight were understandably great. This moment of triumph for all who have participated in the Surveyor project has been well earned, for back of Surveyor's perfect performance on this first flight are years of hard work, painstaking care, and brilliant engineering.
Today our Nation salutes the highly deserving team of scientists, engineers, technicians, and managers--in Government, industry, and the universities--who had a vision and the skills to pursue it successfully.
As the day approaches when men may land on the moon, it is of the greatest importance that we agree to exchange openly all information that could affect their safety and welfare. It is equally important that we preserve these regions for peaceful, scientific activities. I welcome the constructive approach of the Soviet statement of May 31 on a treaty I have proposed to cover these matters and hope that progress can be made rapidly.
Note: The Soviet statement to which the President referred is in the form of a letter dated May 30 from Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko to United Nations Secretary General U Thant (U.N. Doe. A/6341).
For the President's statement of May 7 on the need for a space treaty and for his announcement on December 8 of agreement on a draft treaty, see Items 209 and 643.