Lyndon B. Johnson
June 17, 1968

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report of the National Advisory Council on Extension and Continuing Education.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to transmit the Second Annual Report of the National Advisory Council on Extension and Continuing Education.
In the second year of community service and continuing education programs under the Higher Education Act of 1965, 314 colleges and universities conducted more than 600 programs in 53 states and territories. Seminars, workshops, conferences, special courses, counseling, and consultative services were sponsored throughout the country to help in meeting the complex task of improving the quality of life in our communities. The programs were designed to find new answers and to bring new skills and energies to bear on the broad spectrum of community problems--in government, education, health, manpower, housing and other areas.
Nearly half of the 405,000 participants in continuing education and community service programs were employees of state and local governments and other public bodies. The others represented a wide variety of occupations and professions, ranging from workers in private social welfare agencies to owners of small businesses. Each of these participants has gained increased knowledge of the dimensions of the community problems and acquired new skills to cope with them.
Last year, after consultation with the Council, the Administration developed and submitted legislation to the Congress to improve our Continuing Education programs under the Higher Education Act by:

--Extending the program for another five years.

--Enabling smaller colleges and universities to continue to participate.

--Providing additional funds for experimental projects.

This year, the Administration has added to the still-pending legislation a number of the suggestions made by the Council in this report, including the vital recommendation that appropriations be provided in advance of the academic year during which they will be used.
I commend this report to your attention and urge prompt action on the pending legislation to improve the important program.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

June 17, 1968
Note: The Council was established by Title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 89-329, 79 Stat. 1219).
Its report is entitled "Second Annual Report of the National Advisory Council on Extension and Continuing Education Presented to the President of the United States and the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, March 31, 1968" (42 pp., processed).