Lyndon B. Johnson
June 13, 1968

Remarks at the Ratification Ceremony for the Consular Convention Between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Mr. Ambassador, Secretary Rusk, Members of Congress, distinguished guests:
The treaty we proclaim today is historic. It is the first bilateral treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States. When we entered into diplomatic relations 35 years ago, we agreed on the need for such a treaty. Now we have succeeded in concluding it.
The intervening years have been filled with momentous events. Both of our nations, I think, have made very great progress. During these years, we have been joined together in war, and we have been separated in uneasy and partial peace.
There are still many problems that we have not solved--for which our two countries bear a very heavy responsibility. Some of them remain dangerous.
Nevertheless--if there is the will on both sides--I am convinced that we can move forward to overcome these animosities and suspicions, and the difficulties which have clouded our relations during the past quarter of a century--and which, unfortunately, still cloud them.

The consular convention between the United States and the Soviet Union provides for the performance of consular functions in both countries to facilitate commerce between these two countries. The convention provides also for the protection of the citizens of each country when they are present in the territory of the other. This treaty will promote and encourage normal contacts between the two countries and their citizens.
As reference has already been made yesterday, I was very proud to participate in the overwhelming approval of the nonproliferation treaty by the United Nations. There our two countries have been able to work together and, with the other nations of the world, achieve a new kind of victory-for mankind, for peace, and for the control of arms.
We shall soon act on still another front. Within the next few days, I plan to send the astronaut assistance and return agreement to the Senate for their consideration. This agreement and the outer space treaty represent the first two steps in man's effort to bring the rule of law and the pledge of cooperation to the cosmos. We are grateful to all the nations which have contributed so much to these agreements.
Let us be clear. We still have deep and dangerous differences on certain issues with the Soviet Union. But the peace of the world is too important to let these differences prevent us from exploring every avenue to a more peaceful relationship and to a more cooperative world.
The United States and the Soviet Union have enormous power--and, therefore, they have very great responsibility.

--We must come to grips constructively with these issues which still divide us.

--We must move in parallel where our vital interests permit it.

--We must work together wherever and whenever we can.

We can hope that this treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States will be a sign for the future. It could help to establish a pattern of progress--in disarmament, in space, in science, in the arts, and--I hope-ultimately in a broadening area of politics.
At the end of that road is the welfare and the prosperity of 450 million Russians and Americans--and more than 3 1/2 billion citizens of the community that we call the world.
Note: The President spoke at 11:50 a.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Anatoly F. Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States, and Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, both of whom signed for their respective countries.
The treaty was favorably considered by the Senate on March 16, 1967, was proclaimed by the President on June 13, 1968, and entered into force on July 13, 1968. The text of the treaty is printed in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 50, p. 979) and in Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS 6503).