Lyndon B. Johnson
June 23, 1967

Remarks Following the President's First Meeting With Chairman Kosygin at Glassboro, New Jersey.
THE CHAIRMAN and I have met since we arrived here a little after 11 today.
Our meeting gave us an opportunity to get acquainted with each other. We have exchanged views on a number of international questions.
Among these problems were the Middle East, Vietnam, and the question of nonproliferation of nuclear weapons.
We agreed that it is now very important to reach international agreement on a nonproliferation treaty.
We also exchanged views on the questions of direct bilateral relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America.
Finally, we agreed that discussions on these questions should be continued in New York between Secretary Rusk and Mr. Gromyko during next week.
This meeting today was a very good and very useful meeting. We are in the debt of the great Governor of New Jersey for his hospitality.
We are inviting ourselves to return here again at 1:30 on Sunday afternoon. We will continue our discussions here then. Those of you who have Sunday afternoon off, we will be glad to have you come, too.
Note: The President spoke at 4:40 p.m. at Hollybush, home of the president of Glassboro State College. Chairman Aleksei N. Kosygin responded as follows:
Esteemed ladies and gentlemen:
I wish first of all to thank the President for arranging this meeting, and all the more so that he has arranged a meeting in so pleasant and beautiful a locality and town.
I also want to thank the hosts, the masters of the house who have given us these facilities, have given us a roof over our heads under which we could meet.
I suppose you can get the impression from what the President said that we have amassed such a great number of questions that we weren't able to go through them all today, which is why we have decided to meet again this Sunday.
As regards the statement which the President has just made to you, I have nothing whatsoever to add. I think it was very correctly drawn up.
I hope you won't be offended with us if we have kept you here for all this time and have not told you very much. Please excuse us.