Lyndon B. Johnson
June 24, 1968

Statement by the President on His Gun Control Proposals.
WITHIN the hour, in some city in America, a gunshot will ring out and someone will fall dead or wounded.

The latest report of the Federal Bureau of Investigation documents a shocking increase in crimes where deadly weapons are the tools of violence.

In 1967, there were 7,700 murders with guns--1,200 more murders than the year before.
In 1967, there were 55,000 aggravated assaults with guns--12,000 more aggravated assaults than the year before.
In 1967, there were over 71,000 robberies with guns--again, almost 12,000 more robberies than in 1966.
We are finally moving, after 200 years of inaction, to do something about this shocking slaughter in our midst.
With the Safe Streets Act that I signed only last week, we took the first major step to control mail-order murder. That measure outlaws interstate traffic in pistols, and prohibits the sale of these lethal weapons to children.
Now we are in sight of a second major step--the control of interstate traffic in shotguns, in rifles, and in ammunition.
I asked the Congress on June 6th to enact these safeguards. That legislation must be brought to a vote without delay. And now I propose that Congress go further to give Americans the elementary protection that the people of every other civilized nation have long enjoyed.
I propose first the national registration of every gun in America.
Second, I propose that every individual in this country be required to obtain a license before he is entrusted with a gun.
Registration and licensing have long been an accepted part of daily life in America. Autos, boats, and even dogs and bicycles are commonly registered. Our citizens must get licenses to keep dogs and other pets, to fish, to drive a car.

Certainly no less should be required for the possession of lethal weapons that have caused so much heartbreak and horror in this country in this century.
Surely, the slight inconvenience for the few is minimal when measured against the protection for all.
The course I propose is sane and sensible. It will lead to a safer and a better America.
I talked to the distinguished mayor of San Francisco today about the plea that he made to the citizens of San Francisco, urging them to voluntarily turn in their old, unwanted, and unnecessary guns. Mayor Alioto made a special plea to the parents of San Francisco and he assured the citizens of San Francisco that there would be no questions asked if they would turn in their guns to their local police stations, fire stations, and churches.
I hope that every mayor in every city in our Nation will carefully examine the proposal that the mayor of San Francisco made to his people and will, if they can, follow the lead of this distinguished mayor and establish in all the cities of America a voluntary program, as he has established in San Francisco, so that all Americans can turn in their guns if they do not need or do not want those guns.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President made the statement at 4:37 p.m. in the Fish Room at the White House.
The Gun Control Act of 1968 which was approved on October 22, 1968 (see Item 553), did not contain the national registration and licensing provisions requested by the President.
For the President's letter of June 6, 1968, to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House urging passage of an effective gun control bill, see Item 296.
See also Item 334.