Lyndon B. Johnson
June 18, 1965

The President's Statement to the Cabinet Following Passage of the Excise Tax Reductions
THE CONGRESS has acted with unparalleled promptness and cooperation in approving the reduction of excise taxes.
Chairman Mills, Chairman Byrd, Senator Long, the committees that handled the bill, and the entire Congress deserve a hearty vote of thanks for their fast action.
I am pleased with the strong bipartisan support which has brought about this long overdue relief for both consumers and producers.
The bill will reach the White House today.
I will immediately ask the Treasury Department, the Bureau of the Budget, the Council of Economic Advisers, and my own legal staff to begin the necessary technical review of the measure. I expect them to complete this review over the weekend. While they are working, our merchants will have time to take the necessary inventories to establish floor stock refunds.
The benefits of this measure will begin flowing to consumers, producers, and retailers on Tuesday.
This is the second major tax reduction I will have signed into law in the last year and one-half since I became President. These two measures will reduce the taxes of our citizens by about $18 billion each year.
Despite these reductions, Federal revenues during the period 1961-66 will grow about $18 billion. This compares with the $17.5 billion increase in the preceding 6-year period when there were no tax cuts.
We have also been able to reduce taxes while reducing our deficit almost in half. The deficit in 1964 was $8.2 billion. The budget deficit for the current year was estimated in my January 1965 Budget to be $6.3 billion, and now estimated at $3.8 billion.
These are solid and significant gains. They have come because Government, business, and labor have learned to work together.
This cooperation has been a decisive factor in the record-breaking expansion of the American economy. We are now in the 52d month of that expansion. This is unequaled in peacetime. The reduction in excise taxes will help us to continue to grow.
I believe producers and retailers will match the responsible conduct of the Congress with equal responsibility by passing these reductions along to consumers. This will bring us lower prices, more purchasing power, and new jobs. Two million, two hundred thousand more Americans were working this May than last May. That is a great gain, but we can and must do better. Our tax cuts will help us to do better.
The Treasury has prepared a table showing the distribution of excise tax reduction next year by States.
First, it shows only the amount of tax reduction for calendar 1966--the July and January cuts. The additional reduction will be staged over several years following 1966.
Second, as this tax reduction, which represents increasing purchasing power, is spent and respent throughout the economy, the eventual benefit will be several times the total amount of the tax reduction itself, both for separate States and for the economy as a whole.
Note: The President delivered the statement at 11:00 a.m. to a meeting of the Cabinet in the Cabinet Room at the White House. In the statement he referred to Representative Wilbur D. Mills of Arkansas, Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia, Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, and Senator Russell B. Long of Louisiana, member of the Senate Finance Committee.
After the Cabinet meeting, the President addressed a gathering of White House correspondents as follows:
"The Press Office will have a statement from the President to the Cabinet on the passage of the excise tax reductions. We expect to receive that bill later in the day. The statement is self-explanatory, and I won't elaborate on it.
"We received detailed reports this morning on the international situation from Secretary of State Rusk, and Secretary of Defense, Mr. McNamara, in connection with the military figures.
"Mr. McNamara had an extended press conference yesterday, or the day before, and he has met with groups, and I think I will just ask Secretary Rusk today to review with you what he said to the Cabinet, and to be available for any questions that you may care to ask.
"I will have to excuse myself, and certain other Cabinet members have planes to catch, and luncheon appointments and so forth, and so if they want to, they can retire through the exit. Mr. Secretary, I submit you to their mercies."
Following the President's remarks, Secretary Rusk spoke to the group on U.S. efforts to reach a peaceful settlement in southeast Asia. The text of his remarks, released by the White House on June 18, is printed in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 53, P. 6).
The Excise Tax Reduction Act of 1965 was approved by the President on June 21, 1965 (see Item 326).