Lyndon B. Johnson
March 24, 1967

Statement by the President on the Swearing In of William Roth as Special Representative for Trade Negotiations.
THE FORTUNES of the Kennedy Round will greatly influence the future of international trade. Agreement by the United States and other trading nations on tariff reductions providing new opportunities and stimulation for productive enterprises everywhere will open the path to a world economy of abundance.
On the other hand, if such reductions cannot be managed, if narrow special interests prevail, divisive forces may gain the upper hand, with grave damage to the economic and political fabric of the world community.
William Roth combines all the assets this Nation should bring to bear on so important a problem.
He was Governor Herter's deputy for more than 3 years. He has had a part in every step on this long road. He knows his fellow negotiators, and they know and respect him.
Ambassador Roth has just returned from Geneva, where he reports that agreement has been reached on a timetable for bringing negotiations to a successful conclusion. This is good news for all nations. The world may be certain that the United States will be ready to move as quickly and imaginatively as our partners.
Successful conclusion of the Kennedy Round will not mark the end of the drive toward trade liberalization. Ambassador Roth will begin preparations for a long-range study of our foreign trade policy. He will recommend such legislative and other measures as may be required.
Ambassador Roth will focus this study on ways of improving the trade positions of the developing countries as well as further reduction of trade barriers between industrialized nations.
A Public Advisory Committee will assist Ambassador Roth and will consult with Members of the Congress and other interested and knowledgeable people both here and abroad.
Note: The President spoke at 11:30 a.m. in his office at the White House. During his remarks he referred to Christian A. Herter, former Governor of Massachusetts who previously served as Special Representative for Trade Negotiations.