Lyndon B. Johnson
March 08, 1967

Letter Concerning the Progress Report by the Federal Woman's Award Study Group.
Dear Mrs. Thunberg:
I have considered the initial report of the Federal Woman's Award Study Group and have approved the recommendations you have made. The report clearly indicated that something must be done to further the program for women in the Federal service.
I have asked Secretary Wirtz to have the Interdepartmental Committee on the Status of Women give early consideration to the form of issuance of the proposed Executive Order. I have asked Chairman Macy to initiate immediate action on the other recommendations of the Study Group and to report to me by the first of July the progress made.
As a Nation, we cannot continue to afford through outmoded custom or attitude the senseless waste of the capability potential of American women. It is my firm intent, and I have expressed this many times since I became President, to have the Federal service truly exemplify equal opportunity for all in employment and advancement regardless of race, color, creed, national origin or sex. I am confident that the work of the Study Group will continue to contribute to the attainment of this objective.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Mrs. Penelope H. Thunberg, Chairman, Federal Woman's Award Study Group, U.S. Tariff Commission, Washington, D.C.]
Note: The report (12 pp., processed) is entitled: "Federal Woman's Award Study Group on Careers for Women: Progress Report to the President" and is dated March 3, 1967. Establishment of the Study Group. to be composed of all recipients of the Federal Woman's Award since its inauguration in 1960, was announced by the President on February 28, 1966 (1966 volume, this series, Book I, Item 89).
The report, summarized in a White House Press Office release made public with the President's letter (3 Weekly Comp. Pres. Does., p. 404), made the following recommendations:
1. Development by the Civil Service Commission of a Federal personnel reporting system to furnish data for a full appraisal of the position of women in Government.
2. Strengthening of the Executive order on equal employment opportunity. (This recommendation was implemented on October 13, 1967, with the issuance of Executive Order 11375 on equal opportunity for women in Federal employment and employment by Federal contractors (3 Weekly Comp. Pres. Does., p. 1437; 32 F.R. 14303; 3 CFR, 1967 Comp. p. 320)).
3. Review and modification of examination and qualification requirements by the Civil Service Commission to provide more flexibility and increased credit for community, cultural, social service, and professional association activities.
4. Development of programs to recruit women for part-time employment.
5- Yearly review of agency programs for more effective use of qualified women, including career advancement opportunities.