Lyndon B. Johnson
March 12, 1966

Statement by the President on the Progress of the Appalachian Program.
A YEAR AGO last Wednesday I met with most of the Appalachian Governors in the Rose Garden to sign the Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1965.
At that time I said that the Appalachian program was "the truest example of creative federalism in our times."
The actions of the Appalachian Regional Commission, during the past year, have demonstrated the truth of that statement. Every action that has been taken by the Commission has been without dissent--from either the States or the Federal Government.
Almost 100 percent of the major highway mileage which the Congress has authorized under the Appalachian act--some 2,300 miles--has been approved by the Commission. Approximately 20 percent of that mileage is already either in the planning or construction stages.
Approximately 125 public facility projects designed to expand and improve the economic base of the region have been approved by the Commission. Among these are: vocational educational schools, hospitals, airports, sewage treatment plants, industrial access roads, libraries, educational TV stations, junior and senior colleges, and strip mine reclamation.
The States have forwarded for consideration an additional 125 projects.
In 11 of the Appalachian States, State and local development districts have been funded and staffed with Appalachian funds. These units will enable a coordinated development effort to move ahead at full speed within the Appalachian region.
All 12 of the Appalachian States have submitted their plans for land conservation activity under the Appalachian act. Funds will now be distributed to individual farmers to improve their land, conserve other public investments such as small watershed lakes and the Appalachian streams.
The funds that I have requested under the authority of the Appalachian act are designed to make up past deficiencies of Federal spending in the Appalachian region. They are, of course, only a portion of the total Federal effort that will be made to bring the Appalachian region into the mainstream of American economic life.
Because of the high incidence of poverty in Appalachia, the region will be greatly assisted by the $1.75 billion that has been budgeted for the Office of Economic Opportunity in the coming fiscal year. The projects already started have eased the day-to-day hardships faced by many Appalachians.
Because our national program of assistance to schools is based on a low-income formula, Appalachia will be a prime beneficiary of the $1.3 billion we have asked the Congress to appropriate in fiscal 1967.
A disproportionate share of the less fortunate people in Appalachia are over age 65. I have been told today that Medicare will substantially ease the financial burden faced by these people and the private and public institutions which provide their hospital and medical services.
My greatest personal satisfaction from today's meeting is the support which the Governors have given the Appalachian program. I have assured them of my continued commitment to the program and the goal most desired by the Governors and myself. Our goal is the achievement of Appalachia's full participation in our rapidly expanding and prosperous American economy.

I reaffirm that commitment this morning.
Note: For the President's remarks on March 9, 1965, upon signing the Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1965, see 1965 volume, this series, Book 1, Item 103.
See also Item 122 above.