Lyndon B. Johnson
March 24, 1967

Proclamation 3772—Youth Temperance Education Week

The future of this nation, and perhaps of the world, rests on the integrity and commitment of young Americans who make up almost half of our population. If we neglect the formation of their character, we betray a human trust that transcends the interest of any individual.
Out of a false sophistication, some find it embarrassing to speak of the simple virtues of character that are the mainstays of any great nation or civilization—of duty, sacrifice, fidelity, of sound minds in healthy bodies, of a sense of human brotherhood, love of country, sanctity of the home, purity of ideals.
Yet on these virtues the peace, prosperity, and quality of our society depend.
The condition of our nation today is historically unique. Never has any society come so close to defeating the ancient enemies of poverty, ignorance and ill health. Our social problems loom large in our consciousness, but in the perspective of history, ours is an unprecedented affluence—both in its extent and in its distribution. And that affluence represents both opportunity and temptation. If it lulls us into complacency, if it dims our moral perception, if it tranquilizes our concern for the suffering of the less fortunate, if it encourages self-indulgence and moral indolence, then it is no blessing but a curse.
If our children are to be enriched and not despoiled by the abundance of our material life, we must search our own hearts and minds, our own values and priorities, to be sure that moral and spiritual qualities are not submerged or blunted in the selfish quest for personal security, comfort and luxury. We must accept material abundance gratefully, as a condition which liberates our spirits and frees our minds for the great and beneficent conquests of human sorrow, suffering and weakness.
Human experience illustrates that liberty and discipline are not in opposition; that, in fact, liberty finds its roots in discipline. For the wider goals, the larger dreams, the nobler hopes belong to those who have learned to discipline their impulses and desires, to direct them toward the constructive purpose and the creative challenge.
During this week, set aside as Youth Temperance Education Week, let us consider how we may help our youngsters develop the moral and spiritual strength proudly to accept the challenge to build a better future for all mankind.
To alert young people to the dangers of intemperance and to assist them in the development of moral strength, physical fitness, and civic responsibility, the Congress, by a joint resolution approved May 4, 1966, has requested the President to issue a proclamation designating the week beginning April 23, 1967, as Youth Temperance Education Week.
To this end:
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, do hereby proclaim the week beginning April 23, 1967 as Youth Temperance Education Week; and I invite the Governors of the States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and officials of other areas subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to issue similar proclamations.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this twenty-fourth day of March, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-seven, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-first.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
DEAN RUSK
Secretary of State
NOTE: Proclamation 3772 was not filed with the Office of the Federal Register before the cutoff time of this issue. As printed above, it follows the text of the White House press release.