Lyndon B. Johnson
March 28, 1967

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the Prime Minister of Afghanistan.
AT THE invitation of President Johnson, Prime Minister Mohammad Hashim Maiwandwal of Afghanistan visited Washington from March 28-30, 1967. The President and Prime Minister met on March 28 and exchanged views on matters of mutual interest.
President Johnson took particular pleasure in welcoming the Prime Minister back to Washington, recalling his long and distinguished role as Ambassador from Afghanistan to the United States. The President also recalled the state visit to the United States in September 1963 of Their Majesties King Mohammed Zahir Shah and Queen Homaira, a visit which added substantially to the long record of close friendship between the United States and Afghanistan. He asked the Prime Minister to convey to His Majesty the King the warm affection and admiration of the American people for the Afghan people.
Prime Minister Maiwandwal described for the President Afghanistan's continuing efforts, under the leadership of His Majesty the King, to build and strengthen democratic institutions and to press economic and social progress. He outlined his government's intention, under the Third Five Year Plan, to intensify economic development efforts. The President assured the Prime Minister of the continuing desire of the United States to do its part in assisting Afghanistan's efforts for implementing the Third Five Year Plan. The Prime Minister expressed to the President the deep appreciation of the Afghan people for United States economic assistance.
In this connection the President noted with special satisfaction cooperative efforts of long duration by the United States and Afghanistan in many fields of education.
The Prime Minister reviewed Afghanistan's foreign policy of nonalignment and friendship and cooperation with all nations. He described the problems existing among the countries of the region to which Afghanistan belongs and reiterated Afghanistan's view that these problems can be solved through peaceful means and in an atmosphere of understanding, confidence, and realism.
The two leaders talked about current developments elsewhere in Asia, particularly the urgent need for peace and stability in Southeast Asia. They outlined their respective positions on the problem of Vietnam and agreed that a peaceful and just settlement is urgently needed. The President described for the Prime Minister the many and persisting efforts of the United States to achieve a cessation of hostilities in Vietnam consistent with the freedom and independence of the people of South Vietnam. The Prime Minister stated that implementation of the 1954 Geneva accords is a sound basis for the settlement of the Vietnamese problem.
The President was delighted to know of the intention of the University of California at Santa Barbara to bestow an honorary degree on the Prime Minister during his current visit.