Lyndon B. Johnson
March 14, 1968

Remarks at a Reception Honoring Secretary Trowbridge.
Secretary and Mrs. Trowbridge, Secretary Smith, Secretary Samuels, ladies and gentlemen:
I was a little hesitant about coming over here tonight. The last time I went to a going-away party for a Cabinet member, I got stuck in an elevator.
Just because I got here on time, you probably thought the trip over was uneventful. What you don't know is that I left the White House at noon to get over here. On the way out, I ran into Senator Fulbright, who said he just wanted to ask me a question or two. But he got bronchitis and went home and went to bed--and I came over here to Sandy's party.
Sandy Trowbridge is a young man of considerable foresight.
Still I doubt very much if he ever imagined--on that day several years ago when he was asked to become an Assistant Secretary of Commerce--that things would really turn out quite as they did.
It was always predictable that he would do a first-rate job. It was even possible that somebody might recognize that performance here in Washington.
But not many people would have supposed that he would become one of the youngest Cabinet secretaries in the history of this country--and also one of the youngest retirees.
I don't know what the immediate future holds for this splendid young man. I hope there is a little rest, to begin with.
I spoke to Sandy about a week ago, and I asked him what he was going to do.
He said, "I don't really know, Mr. President, but I can promise you one thing: I'm not going to run for President." Of course, I guess I ought to point out--that was a week ago. [Laughter]
But the long term prediction is much easier. Sandy Trowbridge will be one of this country's leaders--leaders in government service or private life--for decades to come.
About the time he took his chair at the Cabinet table, we were thinking about joining his department and Bill Wirtz's department into one. There may be some folks around town still who remember that proposal. It did not, I may say, become one of my better known legislative achievements.
His beginning, then, was not exactly auspicious. But to a Marine, that is no cause for alarm. Sandy took on his duties with great vigor and with high spirits. He became known as one of the most brilliant, intelligent, cooperative, and determined men in public life. He was a great asset to his Government. He was a great comfort to his President--and he was a model public servant.
I can assure you that I have never enjoyed a working relationship with anyone, anywhere, any time, more than the one that I had with Sandy Trowbridge. And I look forward to a different, but no less satisfactory relationship in the years to come.
To him and to his charming wife and family, I express publicly my deep debt of gratitude for our association and for the constructiveness of his every action.
I want to thank all of you who came over here tonight to wish Sandy well. I must say that I was wondering why so many of you looked so thoughtful out there this evening. Then it occurred to me that perhaps you are all reassessing the possibility of running for President yourself. So I don't want to interrupt you in that. [Laughter] I will just say this: Sandy, thank you very much. God bless you and your lovely family.

Please let me know when and where I can serve you.
Note: The President spoke at 7:38 p.m. at the Department of State. In his opening words he referred to outgoing Secretary of Commerce Alexander B. Trowbridge, who was retiring for health reasons, Mrs. Trowbridge, the new Secretary of Commerce C. R. Smith, and Under Secretary of Commerce Howard J. Samuels. Later he referred to Senator J. W. Fulbright of Arkansas and Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz.
Early in his remarks the President referred to difficulties with an elevator at the Pentagon on the day of the farewell ceremony for Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara (see Item 101).