Lyndon B. Johnson
March 25, 1965

Executive Order 11210—Establishing a Temporary Commission on Pennsylvania Avenue
WHEREAS Pennsylvania Avenue between the Capitol and the White House serves as the main ceremonial avenue connecting the centers of the Legislative and Executive Branches of the United States Government; and
WHEREAS parts of Pennsylvania Avenue have been in large measure developed in a manner consistent therewith; and
WHEREAS other parts of Pennsylvania Avenue have deteriorated in condition and design or are otherwise ill suited to the ceremonial purposes of the Avenue and to the National dignity; and
WHEREAS the President's Ad Hoc Committee on Federal Office Space called the attention of the President to the deterioration and obsolescence of Pennsylvania Avenue and recommended that he enlist the aid of the finest architectural talent in the Nation to develop plans for the improvement of Pennsylvania Avenue to reflect its National significance; and
WHEREAS the President requested distinguished members of the architectural and city planning profession to serve on a Council on Pennsylvania Avenue and to develop a plan for the improvement of the Avenue to a level commensurate with its National purpose; and
WHEREAS Congress, in support of this objective, appropriated funds to assist in the preparation of such plans; and
WHEREAS the President's Council on Pennsylvania Avenue has developed a general plan for the improvement of the Avenue, and the Council has been dissolved; and
WHEREAS the plan developed by the President's Council on Pennsylvania Avenue has been subjected to extensive review by the National Capital Planning Commission and other interested departments and agencies and has been deemed appropriate in its main outlines; and
WHEREAS the Congress will be asked to consider legislation to provide for the improvement of Pennsylvania Avenue:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Temporary Commission on Pennsylvania Avenue, (a) There is hereby established the Temporary Commission on Pennsylvania Avenue (hereinafter referred to as the Commission).
(b) The Commission shall be composed of the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Commerce, the Attorney General, the Postmaster General, the Administrator of General Services, the Housing and Home Finance Administrator, the Chairman of the Commission of Fine Arts, the Chairman of the National Capital Planning Commission, the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, the President of the Board of Commissioners of the District of Columbia, the Director of the National Gallery of Art, and such other members as may be appointed by the President. The Chairman shall invite the Architect of the Capitol to be a member of the Commission.
(c) The President shall appoint from among its members a Chairman of the Commission who shall direct its activities.
(d) Members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the Federal Government shall receive no additional compensation by virtue of membership on the Commission. Other members of the Commission shall be entitled to receive compensation and travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 55a; 5 U.S.C. 73b-2) for persons in the Government service employed intermittently.
(e) The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Sec. 2. Functions of the Commission, (a) The Commission shall advise the President with respect to:
(1) the component parts of the general plan submitted by the President's Advisory Council on Pennsylvania Avenue respecting their feasibility and practicability from the standpoint of financial, engineering, planning, and other relevant considerations;
(2) the development of an orderly, phased program for carrying out the improvement of Pennsylvania Avenue;
(3) effects of the proposed improvements on owners and occupants of private property in and adjoining the area to be improved and actions respecting the improvement program that will assure its achievement with minimum harmful effects upon such private interests and with the least disruption of business within and adjoining the area;
(4) appropriate legislation for carrying out the program of improvement;
(b) Take steps to assure that such recommendations as it may develop respecting plans and programs for the improvement of Pennsylvania Avenue and the Comprehensive Plan for the National Capital and other plans prepared or being prepared by the National Capital Planning Commission are properly coordinated.
(c) Promote an understanding of the plan and its objectives among the public generally; and
(d) Undertake such other actions as may be permitted by law and requested by the President in furtherance of the objectives of this order.
Sec. 3. Commission staff and consultants. (a) The Chairman is authorized to appoint such personnel as may be necessary to assist the Commission in connection with the performance of its functions.
(b) The Commission is authorized to obtain services in accordance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Act of August 2, 1946 (5U.S.C.55a).
Sec. 4. Federal agencies. (a) As deemed necessary to facilitate the work of the Commission, the Chairman may request the head of any Executive department or agency whose activities may relate to the objectives of the Commission to designate a liaison officer to consult with the Commission on matters of common concern.
(b) Upon request of the Chairman, each Executive department or agency is authorized and directed, consistent with law, to furnish the Commission available information which the Commission may require in the performance of its functions.
(c) Each Federal agency represented on the Commission shall furnish such necessary assistance to the Commission as may be authorized by Section 214 of the Act of May 3, 1945, 59 Stat. 134 (31U.S.C. 691).
(d) The National Capital Planning Commission is hereby designated as the agency which shall provide administrative services for the Commission.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House,
March 25, 1965.