Lyndon B. Johnson
March 29, 1967

Remarks to the Directors of the State Departments of Commerce.
I HOPE that you will indulge me and understand my delay. I am running a little bit behind schedule.
Nevertheless, I am very glad that you honored us by coming here to see us today.
Ten days ago we had a most productive session here in the White House with the Governors of the various States in the Union. There were some 49 present.
Just before they came, I submitted to Congress a message on improving the quality of government at all levels--Federal--and I guess we need it more than anybody--State and local.
I spoke of the urgent need to improve the administration of the new programs that we have adopted in the last few years, for when there is inefficient, shortsighted, or wasteful administration of health, education, economic development, or welfare programs, really it is not us bureaucrats who suffer. It is the people who suffer in the long run.
Your hands, as directors of the State departments of commerce, will be operating the levers of many of these new programs.
While we can plan together and while we can offer resources, experience, and technical assistance to you, their success or their failure will depend in the final analysis on your success and on your performance.
I said in this year's State of the Union message, "Federal energy is essential but it is not enough. Only a total working partnership among the Federal, State, and local governments can succeed."
One example of the kind of cooperative program that we are trying to establish is the State Technical Service Act.
I called it a sleeper when I signed it into law in September of 1965. Little was even written about it, but much has already been achieved under it.
In 1966, 24 States submitted annual programs under the terms of the act leading to the approval of 600 technical service projects.
More than 100 of your institutions of higher learning have participated in projects that were approved last year.
This year we expect to nearly double the number of State programs approved.
The Federal Government has spent more than $6 million strengthening local businesses under the act.
This year I asked Congress to appropriate $35 million for two measures to help State and local governments prepare their citizens for careers in public life.
Under the Public Service Education Act, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, Mr. Gardner, would be authorized to provide fellowships for young men and women who want to embark on the adventure of government service.
Funds would be available for research in the new methods of education and training facilities for advanced study in public affairs and administration.
I have asked $10 million to finance this act.
The Intergovernmental Manpower Act, which I have just submitted, would be in part an exchange program between the Federal Government and the State governments.
The Civil Service Commission would provide fellowships to State and local employees in order that they can take graduate training.
The act would allow increased mobility between the Federal and State governments, Federal employees could spend up to 2 years working for State and local agencies with no loss of job rights or job benefits.
I have asked for $25 million under this act.
I think it is of vital importance for it encourages the exchange of thoughts and ideas that will benefit all realms of government-State and local as well as national.
It will give public servants in the statehouses, city halls, and Washington a better appreciation of the problems that their counterparts are facing.
As you know, I have suggested the formation of a new Cabinet post, the Department of Business and Labor, combining the Departments of Commerce and Labor into one.
Both of these great components of our dynamic society would, operating in unison, enjoy greater strength than they have today.
The new department will have a voice that will be heard loud and clear throughout the land on all the economic policy decisions of the country.
It will be the chief instrument for implementing national policies affecting business and labor.
Our progress has been substantial but our work is not done.
I recently told your Governors that we face "a tremendous job of reorganization, of systematic management, calling upon all of our public and private resources at all levels of our national life."
The closer we can work together the sooner, the better, the more economically we can get the total job done.
I was happy to have had this chance to see you today, although I have been delayed.
Your interest in our ideas is a healthy and a very encouraging sign. If we are to operate this Government--this Government of, for, and by the people--nothing is more important than public knowledge and an awareness of its goals and its aspirations.
It is our common obligation to make this process of education meaningful.
I want to think that I can count on your help.
I want to thank you for coming here and meeting with me.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 2:24 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.