Lyndon B. Johnson
March 19, 1966

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House Transmitting Report "A Ten-Year Program of Federal Water Resources Research."
[Released March 19, 1966. Dated March 18, 1966]
Dear Mr. President: (Dear Mr. Speaker:)
Last year, through my Special Assistant for Science and Technology, I asked the Committee on Water Resources Research of the Federal Council for Science and Technology to speed the development of a comprehensive, long-range water research program.

That task has now been completed.
This report--"A Ten-Year Program of Federal Water Resources Research"-- is the result of our efforts.
The growth of our population and industry has placed new demands on our water supplies. We are confronted with water shortages in many sections of our country. Today, virtually every river system in America is touched by pollution. This menace grows more serious each day.
As I have said before, we must combine all of the means at our disposal--Federal, state, local and private--to meet the challenges posed by our water resource problems. The Water Resources Planning Act and the Water Pollution Control Act, passed at the last session, and the Clean Rivers Demonstration Act now pending in the Congress are important steps forward.
We must seek the knowledge and understanding essential to support our efforts.
We must apply the very best of science and technology to solve our mounting water resource problems.
We must continue our search for bold, new ideas.
A strong, well planned program of research has now become a national necessity. The growth of knowledge in this vital area is important to our future.
The ten-year research program outlined in the report--which will be refined and revised as the future state of our knowledge grows--establishes a guideline for action. The report pinpoints those areas of research in need of immediate attention and specifies research goals in over 40 important categories. It has been used as a basis for preparing our Fiscal Year 1967 Budget requests.
I recommend that the various committees of Congress concerned with our water ten sources carefully consider what this report has to say.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Hubert H. Humphrey, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The report, entitled "A Ten-Year Program of Federal Water Resources Research" and dated February 1966 (Government Printing Office, 88 pp.), was issued by the Committee on Water Resources Research of the Federal Council for Science and Technology.