Lyndon B. Johnson
March 01, 1968

Message to the Congress Transmitting the Sixth Annual Report of the Peace Corps.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit to the Congress the Sixth Annual Report of the Peace Corps--an idea come of age, no longer a novelty but now a part of American life.
The Peace Corps is one of President Kennedy's most enduring achievements. It is now larger than ever. Today, the Peace Corps is a leading employer of new college graduates. Last year 21,000 college seniors formally applied for membership in the Peace Corps--3.5 percent of the graduating classes. In one college, 25 percent applied, in another 20 percent and in a third 17 percent.
More than 12,000 Peace Corpsmen are doing America's work in 57 countries. They are in:

--Micronesia, on lonely islands across the Pacific, working in many fields--from teaching to drafting legislative proposals.

--Peru, helping villagers develop schools and social clubs.

--Colombia, helping expand and improve the educational television network.
--Malawi, conducting a successful program of tuberculosis control.

In the long run, perhaps the Peace Corps' most significant contribution will be made at home. Last year, for the first time, the number of returned Volunteers surpassed those in the field. By 1980, the Agency estimates 200,000 of them will be involved in every level of our society.
Many Volunteers return and continue their studies; others enter the business world. What most returned Volunteers seek is a career serving others. Thus, they teach in ghettos, work in anti-poverty projects, and join the government on the local or national level.
This, then, is the Peace Corps: seven years old and still growing. The idea of service to humanity is much older, but few institutions have embraced the concept as fervently and capably as has the Peace Corps. As this report indicates, our journey has begun and the future is promising.
If you would confirm your faith in the American future--take a look at the Peace Corps.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House March 1, 1968
NOTE The 53-page report is entitled "Peace Corps 6th Annual Report."