Lyndon B. Johnson
May 01, 1968

Remarks Upon Presenting the Medal of Honor to Capt. Robert F. Foley and Sgt. John F. Baker, Jr., USA.
Captain Foley, Sergeant Baker, Secretary Ball, Secretary Resor, General Johnson, Members of the Congress, ladies and gentlemen:
The battlefield is the scarred and the lonely landscape of man's greatest failure. But it is a place where heroes walk. Today we come here to the East Room of the White House to honor two soldiers, two soldiers who--in the same battle and at the same time--met the surpassing tests of their lives with acts of courage far beyond the call of duty.
Those who were there will not forget that day.
Captain Foley and Sergeant Baker fought in the same company. Now, together, they join the noblest company of them all.
They fought because their Nation believed that only by honoring its commitments, and only by denying aggression its conquest, could the conditions of peace be created in Southeast Asia and the world.
Now we are pursuing--with all the resources at our command--the hope of peace through negotiations.
But until honorable peace is a reality, we must continue to rely and to depend on the qualities of courage and endurance which men like this have demonstrated and which men like this possess. Men like this have seen our country through every crisis that has ever confronted our Nation.
There will come a day when the last American soldier will have stacked arms in Vietnam. The last sortie will have been flown. The last ship will have sailed out.
No American bases will remain. No American flags will mark the presence of American strength.
But that distant land will always now be part of the legend of our own. Quan Dau Tieng and a hundred other places which once were battlefields will echo to an ancient roll call--the roster of brave men like these, who stood and who fought when freedom asked it.
I was talking only this week to young Members of Congress who have traveled up and down the battlefields of Vietnam-former graduates of West Point like Congressman Murphy of New York who went there to see, to hear, and to observe, Congressman Irwin of Connecticut, and others. Without exception, those men who know and those men who have seen, come back and tell me that never in all of our glorious history have the American people ever had more reason to be proud of their men--their morale, their competency, and their cause-than we do now.
So I want to say to Captain Foley, to Sergeant Baker, and to their loved ones, because of what they did, freedom has survived where freedom could have been crushed so easily.
Let us not forget that as we continue to press forward vigorously toward the peace for which every person hungers. No, let us not forget them. And we will not forget them.

Thank you.
[Secretary of the Army Stanley R. Resor read the two citations, the text of which follows.]
The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, March 3, 1863, has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
CAPTAIN ROBERT F. FOLEY, INFANTRY UNITED STATES ARMY
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty:
On 5 November 1966, while serving as Commander, Company A, 2nd Battalion, 27th Infantry, near Quan Dau Tieng, Republic of Vietnam, Captain Foley's company was ordered to extricate another company of the Battalion. Moving through the dense jungle to aid the besieged unit, Company A encountered a strong enemy force occupying well concealed, defensive positions, and the company's leading element quickly sustained several casualties. Captain Foley immediately ran forward to the scene of most intense action to direct the company's efforts. Deploying one platoon on the flank, he led the other two platoons in an attack on the enemy in the face of intense fire. During this action both radio operators accompanying him were wounded. At grave risk to himself he defied the enemy's murderous fire, and helped the wounded operators to a position where they could receive medical care. As he moved forward again one of his machine gun crews was wounded. Seizing the weapon, he charged forward firing the machine gun, shouting orders and rallying his men thus maintaining the momentum of the attack. Under increasingly heavy enemy fire he ordered his assistant to take cover and, alone, Captain Foley continued to advance firing the machine gun until the wounded had been evacuated and the attack in this area could be resumed. When movement on the other flank was halted by the enemy's fanatical defense, Captain Foley moved to personally direct this critical phase of the battle. Leading the renewed effort he was blown off his feet and wounded by an enemy grenade. Despite his painful wounds he refused medical aid and persevered in the forefront of the attack on the enemy redoubt. He led the assault on several enemy gun emplacements and, single-handedly, destroyed three such positions. His outstanding personal leadership, under intense enemy fire during the fierce battle which lasted for several hours, inspired his men to heroic efforts and was instrumental in the ultimate success of the operation. Captain Foley's magnificent courage, selfless concern for his men and professional skill reflect the utmost credit upon himself and the United States Army.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, March 3, 1863, has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor, to
SERGEANT JOHN F. BAKER, JR. UNITED STATES ARMY
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty:
Sergeant John F. Baker, Jr. (then Private First Class), greatly distinguished himself on 5 November 1966 while serving with Company A, 2d Battalion, 27th Infantry, on a combat operation in the Republic of Vietnam. En route to assist another unit that was engaged with the enemy, Company A came under intense enemy fire and the lead man was killed instantly. Sergeant Baker immediately moved to the head of the column and together with another soldier knocked out two enemy bunkers. When his comrade was mortally wounded, Sergeant Baker, spotting four Viet Cong snipers, killed all of them, evacuated the fallen soldier and returned to lead repeated assaults against the enemy positions, killing several more Viet Cong. Moving to attack two additional enemy bunkers, he and another soldier drew intense enemy fire and Sergeant Baker was blown from his feet by an enemy grenade. He quickly recovered and single-handedly destroyed one bunker before the other soldier was wounded. Seizing his fallen comrade's machine gun, Sergeant Baker charged through the deadly fusillade to silence the other bunker. He evacuated his comrade, replenished his ammunition and returned to the forefront to brave the enemy fire and continue the fight. When the forward element was ordered to withdraw, he carried one wounded man to the rear. As he returned to evacuate another soldier, he was taken under fire by snipers, but raced beyond the friendly troops to attack and kill the snipers. After evacuating the wounded man, he returned to cover the deployment of the unit. His ammunition now exhausted, he dragged two more of his fallen comrades to the rear. Sergeant Baker's selfless heroism, indomitable fighting spirit, and extraordinary gallantry were directly responsible for saving the lives of several of his comrades, and inflicting serious damage on the enemy. His acts were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Army and reflect great credit upon himself and the Armed Forces of his country.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The President spoke at 11:40 a.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his opening words he also referred to Under Secretary of State George W. Ball, Secretary of the Army Stanley R. Resor, and Gen. Harold K. Johnson, Army Chief of Staff.