Lyndon B. Johnson
May 08, 1964

Remarks Honoring J. Edgar Hoover on His 40th Anniversary as Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Mr. Hoover, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minority Leader, Members of the Congress, distinguished guests, and friends:
One of the best things about going away on a trip is to come home and find so many old and dear friends waiting for you here in the backyard.
The White House gardeners were anxious for me to make this trip to the Appalachian States because they said they wanted me out of town long enough so they could cut the grass in the flower garden.
All during this last trip to the depressed areas, I kept thinking what a great Nation this is, and I kept thinking that the foundation of our greatness is the ability of our people to solve our problems by reasonable and compassionate means.
There is another reason, too, for America's greatness, and that is the tireless devotion of those men and women who day in and day out serve the public welfare. I believe J. Edgar Hoover to be such a man. J. Edgar Hoover is a household word. He is a hero to millions of decent citizens and an anathema to evil men. No other American now or in our past has ever served the cause of justice more faithfully or so well. No other American has fought so long or so hard for a safer and a better national life.
There is a story--a true story, I think--that they tell me about Frank Murphy when he was the Attorney General of the United States under President Franklin Roosevelt. The Attorney General went to his office one Sunday and was stopped by the Justice Department guard who asked for his identification. Frank had forgotten his wallet.
"I just can't let you in this building without identification," said the guard.
"But I am Frank Murphy, the Attorney General of the United States," said Frank.
"Mister," said the guard, "I don't give a damn if you are J. Edgar Hoover himself. You can't get in!"
J. Edgar Hoover has served the Government since 1917. He served nine Presidents and this Sunday, May 10th, he celebrates his 40th year as the Director of the FBI.
Under his guiding hand, the FBI has become the greatest criminal investigation body in the history of the world. The country has been made safer from groups that would subvert our way of life and men who would harm and destroy our persons.
Edgar Hoover has been my close personal friend for almost 30 years, and he was my close neighbor for 19 years. I know he loved my dog, and I think he thought a little bit of me as a neighbor, and I am proud and happy to join the rest of the Nation this afternoon in honoring this quiet and humble and magnificent public servant.
Edgar, the law says that you must retire next January when you reach your 70th birthday- And knowing you as I do, Edgar, I know you won't break the law, but the Nation cannot afford to lose you and, therefore, by virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in the President of the United States, I have just now signed an Executive order exempting you from compulsory retirement for an indefinite period of time.
Again, Edgar, congratulations and accept the gratitude of a grateful Nation.
Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden at the White House. His opening words referred to J. Edgar Hoover, Representative John W. McCormack of Massachusetts, Speaker of the House, and Senator Everett McK. Dirksen of Illinois, Minority Leader. The text of Mr. Hoover's response was also released.
Earlier the President signed Executive Order 11154 "Exemption of J. Edgar Hoover from Compulsory Retirement for Age" (29 F.R. 6233, 3 CFR, 1964 Supp.).