Lyndon B. Johnson
May 10, 1966

Remarks to Reporters at the Conclusion of a Security Council Meeting on Vietnam
Ladies and gentlemen:
We are delighted to welcome back one of our most dedicated public servants and one of our most valuable counselors, Ambassador Lodge.
Earlier this afternoon he reported to me privately in some detail about the events in his area of the world and his evaluation of the situation there.
He brought back information that we do not always get from the written cable. I had a very profitable visit with him. We had a thorough exchange of viewpoints.
I asked him to join me in the Cabinet Room and make available to my other counselors here his impressions and judgments and conclusions, as well as a general review.
This is the first time that he has been back in almost 9 months. He will be here through the week. He will spend some time with Mr. Komer and Mr. Rostow, and some time with the various people at the table. They will divide into various groups.
This afternoon we had an agenda that included a rather full report from General Wheeler on the military situation in Vietnam. We had a discussion of the political and economic situation, the issues as he sees them--a general report from Ambassador Lodge.
He was followed by a discussion led by Secretary Rusk on the key political issues, at the conclusion of which Secretary McNamara supplemented some of General Wheeler's statements on the military situation there and the issues involved on his part.
I reviewed with them some of my views on Vietnam from the day I took over the Presidency: on education, health, agriculture, the economy of South Vietnam, my Baltimore speech, the Honolulu Conference, our desire to get the Government of South Vietnam, General Westmoreland, and others to cooperate with Ambassador Lodge and Ambassador Porter in the efforts that we were making in this field.
We not only have military problems here, as everyone knows, but we have political problems and economic problems.
I have asked one of my most trusted and able advisers, Mr. Komer, to take command of this operation and head the post here, with Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, and others, in an attempt to make this economic and political program effective.
Mr. Komer discussed, at some length, the key economic issues there. We reviewed generally the effects of the Honolulu Conference; Secretary Freeman's visit with 15 of the outstanding people from our universities and our colleges, who made a thorough study; and Secretary Gardner's report.
Mr. Komer will arrange to have certain task forces meeting throughout the week while Ambassador Lodge is here.
That is the essence of what took place this afternoon. I have explained to these wise men, all of whom I rely on for advice, to supply me with all the information and knowledge they had.
I have it now and I have passed as much of it on to you as I could.
Note: The President spoke at 7:20 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. In the course of his remarks he referred to Henry Cabot Lodge, U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Vietnam, Robert W. Komer, Special Assistant to the President, Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President, Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of Defense, Gen. William C. Westmoreland, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, William J. Porter, Deputy U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Vietnam, Orville L. Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture, and John W. Gardner, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare.
For the President's Baltimore speech of April 7, 1965, see 1965 volume, this series, Book I, Item 172.
Material relating to the Honolulu Conference of February 6-8, 1966, appears above as Items 53-55.
For the missions to Vietnam by Secretaries Freeman and Gardner to which the President referred at the close of his remarks, see Items 56 and 106. See also Item 85.