Lyndon B. Johnson
May 06, 1965

Executive Order 11221—Amendment of Executive Order No. 11126, Relating to the Status of Women
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, it is ordered that Executive Order No. 11126 of November 2, 1963, which established a Committee and a Council relating to the status of women, be amended as follows:
(1) By substituting for Section 101 (a) the following:
Section 101. (a) There is hereby established the interdepartmental Committee on the Status of Women (hereinafter referred to as the "Committee"), which shall be composed of the Secretary of Labor, who shall be the Chairman of the Committee, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Attorney General, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, the Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity, and an Assistant Secretary of Labor to be designated by the Secretary of Labor, all ex officio. The Chairman may designate a Vice-Chairman of the Committee from its membership, and the Director of the Women's Bureau of the Department of Labor shall serve as Executive Vice-Chairman of the Committee, and shall be an ex officio member thereof.
(2) By substituting for Section 103 the following:
Sec. 103. Annually the Committee, after consultation with the Citizens' Advisory Council, shall transmit a report to the President concerning the status of women.
(3) By substituting for Section 201 the following:
Sec. 201. There is hereby established the Citizens' Advisory Council on the Status of Women (hereinafter referred to as the "Council"), which shall be composed of 20 members appointed by the President, one of whom he shall designate to serve as Chairman. The Council shall meet at the call of the Chairman of the Committee, but not less than twice a year. Members of the Council shall serve without compensation from the United States.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House,
May 6, 1965.