Lyndon B. Johnson
May 09, 1965

Statement by the President Upon Issuing Order Prescribing Standards of Ethical Conduct for Government Officers and Employees.
GOVERNMENT personnel bear a special responsibility to be fair and impartial in their dealings with those who have business with the Government. We cannot tolerate conflicts of interest or favoritism--or even conduct which gives the appearance that such actions are occurring--and it is our intention to see that this does not take place in the Federal Government.
I have, therefore, today signed an Executive order which codifies, clarifies, and strengthens the standards of ethical conduct for executive branch personnel.
The unusually high standards of honesty, integrity, and impartiality of United States Government employees are cause for pride on the part of all Americans, for unquestionably they are among the highest ever attained by any government--national or local-that has ever existed. Although the overwhelming majority of Federal employees experience absolutely no problem in this regard, there are some whose duties on occasion place them in difficult or awkward situations, and thus the order issued today lays down general guidelines and standards of conduct as clearly as possible. In large measure, the special problems faced by Federal employees lie in the area of judgment, propriety, and good taste. Obviously, these cannot be legislated or prescribed by order or regulation. I am confident, however, that the Executive order will direct the attention of both Federal employees and those who do business with the Federal Government to this sometimes difficult area. In drafting the order, every effort has been made to take into account the rights and privileges of Federal employees and, on the other hand, the right of the public to have confidence in the fairness and integrity of Government personnel.
One of the main purposes of the Executive order is to encourage individuals faced with questions involving subjective judgment to seek counsel and guidance. Thus, the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission has been instructed to work with each department and agency head to establish within his organization designated individuals who can provide the guidance and interpretation necessary to relate general principles to specific situations.
The order requires all officials appointed by the President and reporting directly to him and certain other Federal officials and employees to file statements of their financial interests. It also imposes strict limitations on the acceptance of gifts, entertainment, and favors by executive branch personnel.
The order assigns central responsibility to the Civil Service Commission for issuing Government-wide regulations implementing the order and for reviewing supplementary agency regulations covering their special situations. This should insure consistency and individual agency flexibility.
The order emphasizes the strong intention of the administration that the affairs of Government be conducted openly, honorably, honestly, and impartially.
Part I states the general Government policy regarding the ethical conduct expected of all officials and employees.
Part II sets forth standards governing the conduct of executive branch personnel with specific attention given to the acceptance of gifts, entertainment, and favors; outside employment, teaching, and writing; and the use of Government information for private personal gain.
Part III provides standards of conduct for temporary, part-time, or intermittent advisers and consultants to the Government.
Part IV spells out the requirement that top officials file statements listing their outside financial interests.
The remaining parts of the order are concerned with certain delegations of authority to the Civil Service Commission and to agency heads under the conflicts-of-interest or other laws and under the order.
Note: The President referred to Executive Order 11222 "Prescribing standards of ethical conduct for Government officers and employees," issued May 8, 1965 (30 F.R. 6469; 3 CFR, 1965 Supp.).