Lyndon B. Johnson
May 02, 1968

Presidential Unit Citation Awarded the 2d Battalion, 31st Regiment, 21st Infantry Division, Army of the Republic of Vietnam.
BY VIRTUE of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States, I have today awarded
THE PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION (ARMY) FOR EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM
TO 2D BATTALION, 31ST REGIMENT 21ST INFANTRY DIVISION
ARMY OF THE REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
The 2d Battalion, 31st Regiment, 21st Infantry Division, Army of the Republic of Vietnam, distinguished itself by gallantry in action while engaged in military operations in Chuong Thien Province, Republic of Vietnam on 4 September 1966. Employed as a heliborne reaction force during operation Dan Chi, the 2d Battalion inflicted a serious defeat on the enemy. Another ARVN infantry battalion was pinned down in an open rice paddy in a savage fight against a main force Viet Cong battalion reinforced with a local guerrilla company. The total estimated enemy strength was over one thousand men. The enemy was fighting from well-prepared log and mud entrenchments with mutually supporting fields of fire across open rice paddies. The 2d Battalion was ordered to move into the operational area to reinforce the sister battalion and attack along the friendly forces' left flank into the left sector of the objective. The enemy attempted to ward off this attack on their flank by placing additional troops into position directly to the front of the 2d Battalion. Due to the increased intensity of enemy fire, the total deployment of the 2d Battalion required one hour and fifteen minutes. Upon completion of this deployment, rapid reorganization permitted the unit to attack almost immediately. Without the assistance of artillery, air strikes or armed helicopter support, the 2d Battalion assaulted across 600 meters of open rice paddies. Advancing upon heavily fortified positions, the 2d Battalion was engaged by six enemy machine guns. All organic support weapons were employed in the destruction of these positions. Now within 100 meters of the wood line, the 2d Battalion closed with the enemy in ferocious hand to hand combat. The pride, courage and determination of these brave soldiers, coupled with outstanding leadership at all echelons, routed the enemy from his positions, resulting in 105 enemy killed in action. The dedication and unit professionalism which characterized the performance of the Battalion was instrumental in the fierce and rapid destruction of the Viet Cong insurgents. The actions of the 2d Battalion, 31ST Regiment, were in the highest traditions of all fighting men and have reflected great credit upon the unit and the Army of the Republic of Vietnam.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON