Lyndon B. Johnson
May 08, 1965

Remarks in the Capitol at the Presentation of the Veritas Medal to the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
THIS IS one occasion--and one audience-where the President of the United States is not the principal speaker.
I say that figuratively as well as literally. While there are many challenges I am willing to face, 30 years of close observation and study have persuaded me it would be unwise to challenge John McCormack to an oratorical contest on an occasion such as this.
I come not to speak publicly but simply to join quietly and privately in paying tribute to one of the most inspiring men I have known--and one of the great Americans of our times.
In times of peace, in times of war, in moments of tumult, and in times of tranquillity, John McCormack has shown himself to be just that--a great man, a good man, a generous and genuine man.
It is especially fitting that he should receive this medal from Providence College.
When we add up the sum of John McCormack's career, it is clear that he has devoted his public life to making this Nation and this world better and safer for young people. There can be no more noble use for life on this earth than that.
The name of this medal aptly describes the Speaker's most outstanding qualities-he is true and noble and faithful.
Theodore Roosevelt once wrote to a Member of Congress saying: "I entirely appreciate loyalty to one's friends, but loyalty to the cause of justice and honor stands above it."
John McCormack has always been loyal to his friends. This is why they love him. But that loyalty has never come ahead of his fidelity to the cause of justice and honor.
And that is why the Nation honors him and will never forget his leadership.
At the White House, Mr. Speaker, I operate under the rules of the Senate-where there is little limit on the length of a speech. In your presence, however, I am reminded of my days in the House where the limitations are somewhat more severe.
So while I have exceeded the 1-minute rule, I will quit speaking and like any good former Member of the House, take my seat before your gavel calls me to order.
Note: The President spoke at noon in the Rayburn Room at the U.S. Capitol.
The presentation of the Veritas Medal, the highest academic award of Providence College, Providence, R.I., to Representative John W. McCormack of Massachusetts, Speaker of the House of Representatives, was made by the Very Reverend Vincent C. Dore, president of the college.