Lyndon B. Johnson
May 11, 1967

Message to the Congress Transmitting 15th Semiannual Report of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to submit to the Congress this report of continued progress in the Nation's space program.
The report covers the months January to June, 1966. Since then, the risk to human life and the formidable technical difficulties that must accompany the exploration of space were vividly brought home to every American by the tragic fire which cost the lives of three of our brave astronauts.
The way to the stars was never thought to be easy. But the goal we seek promises such great benefits to mankind that we must press on. We must surmount difficulty and lessen danger so we can continue in the steady pursuit of this historic mission.
The achievements reported here reflect not only our progress in space flight, but also new steps taken toward the real objective of all our efforts in space--the application of new knowledge to bettering the lives of all people. Already, we see dramatic examples of success in the satellites which have improved our weather forecasts and navigation, and which are extending radio and television communication to the farthermost regions of the earth.
We are determined that space be kept free from the weapons of war. Just recently the Senate ratified the Treaty on Outer Space. This historic action dramatizes our continuing efforts to cooperate with other nations in conducting experiments, sharing data, and developing controls to assure that the space efforts of every nation will serve the cause, not of war, but of peace and prosperity for all mankind. The Senate's action, taken without a dissenting vote, enables me to reaffirm as President what I said as a Senator to the United Nations in 1958:
"On the goal of dedicating outer space to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind, there are no differences within our government, between our parties or among our people."
The United States space program, as reflected in this report, continues to exemplify our Nation's conviction that the road to peace, progress, and abundance is through continued cooperation among all nations.

I commend this report to your attention.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

May 11, 1967
Note: The report is entitled "Fifteenth Semiannual Report to Congress, January 1-June 30, 1966" (Government Printing Office, 243 pp.).
The outer space treaty was favorably considered by the Senate on April 25, 1967, and after ratification entered into force on October 10, 1967. The text is printed in the Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS 6347).
For the President's statement of January 27, 1967, on the death of the three astronauts, see Item 19.
See also Items 38, 425.