Lyndon B. Johnson
May 04, 1964

Remarks Upon Presenting the Federal Aviation Agency Award to Mrs. Jerrie Mock
Mrs. Mock, Mr. Mock, and all the little Mocks:
Mr. Halaby and I have been discussing the wisdom of developing a plane that will fly at Mach 2.3, and it looks like, with Mrs. Mock's three children, Mr. Mock and Mrs. Mock, we now have a Mach 5 to shoot at.
I am very pleased this morning to present the Federal Aviation Agency's Decoration for Exceptional Service to you, Jerrie Mock. I am especially pleased because this is only the second time the award has been given to anyone outside of that agency.
Let me make one thing clear. Contrary to what you have heard, this award has not at any time been offered to me for the records that I allegedly broke for low altitude flying down in Texas!
We are very proud of Jerrie Mock. All America shares the happiness of her family and her accomplishments on behalf of aviation. She is the first woman to fly solo around the world. She is the first woman to fly across both oceans alone. She is the first woman to cross the Pacific in either direction in a single-engine plane. She is the first woman to fly from the United States to Africa, across the North Atlantic. She set an around-the-world speed record for men and women in aircraft between 2200 and 3800 pounds.
After lightning had struck Lady Bird's plane twice, when I pointed out that Mrs. Mock had done all these things in a single-engine plane, I got her back in Air Force One.
So as a housewife and a mother, Mrs. Mock demonstrates that the progress of our society, the promise of our system, can be fulfilled only if women are given the opportunity to utilize fully their talents and energies in meeting the great challenges of our day. So today, in order that this Government may make full use of Mrs. Mock's courage and her knowledge and her experience, I am appointing her Vice Chairman of the Women's Aviation Committee, which is an important consulting group to the Federal Aviation Agency.
Mrs. Jane Hart, who honors us with her presence this morning, is Chairman of this group, and it is composed of outstanding women in aviation from all sections of our land. This committee will help Administrator Halaby eliminate the red tape in United States airports, help promote safety in aviation, and I hope will be able to get us all on the ground a little earlier when we are behind schedule. I am proud to have Mrs. Mock as a leader in this useful work.
It is with pride, therefore, that I now confer upon Jerrie Mock the Federal Aviation Agency's highest and most coveted award, the Decoration for Exceptional Service. The citation, Mrs. Mock, reads as follows:
"The Federal Aviation Agency Decoration For Exceptional Service is awarded to Jerrie Mock for her historic and courageous flight around the world, Columbus, Ohio, March 19-April 17, 1964. Her journey marks the first time the globe was spanned by a woman flying alone."
America is not only proud of her, but Ohio is very proud of her. We are delighted that her Senator, Senator Lausche, could be here this morning.
Now, if I may, I have an award to present to Mrs. Mock's 4-year-old daughter, Valerie, if she will come here. Valerie?
I am told that today is your 4th birthday. In 1907 another 4th birthday was being celebrated, the 4th anniversary of the first powered flight ever made. That was the first flight of two other Ohioans, Orville and Wilbur Wright. The Wrights are not here for me to decorate them on their anniversary today, but, Valerie, here is your 4th birthday cake. Try to blow out the candies. Make a wish.
Have one more go. That's it!
Now Valerie, you take that White House cake and you be careful who you let eat it.
Mrs. Mock: Thank you very much, Mr. President.
Note: The presentation was made at 12:45 p.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. Mrs. Mock's husband, Russell, and their three children, Roger, Gary, and Valerie, were among those attending the ceremony.
During the course of his remarks the President referred to Mrs. Jane Hart, wife of Senator Philip A. Hart of Michigan, Najeeb E. Halaby, Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency, and Senator Frank J. Lausche of Ohio.