Lyndon B. Johnson
May 18, 1965

Statement by the President on Making Public a Memorandum on the Appropriation for Military Needs in Viet-Nam.
AS I HAVE stated on numerous occasions, the entire resources of the Federal Government are available to assist our men in South Viet-Nam. Our soldiers, sailors, and airmen have a blank check for the equipment they need to assist the South Vietnamese. We seek no wider war, but so long as American men are in South Viet-Nam, they shall have the very best support that this country can give them. The speedy action by the Congress on this appropriation is a testament to the support our men have from the American people.
Note: The statement was part of a White House release making public a memorandum to the President from Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara on the supplemental appropriation for southeast Asia, approved May 7. The text of the memorandum follows: Memorandum for the President:
You asked the Congress on May 4 to appropriate an additional $700 million to meet mounting military requirements in Vietnam. Two days later Congress passed and sent you an additional appropriation for that amount as an emergency fund for Southeast Asia.
When you approved this appropriation on May 7, you said, "This money will be spent for arms, for weapons of war, for helicopters, for ammunition, for planes, not because we want war, but because the aggressors have made them necessary."
During the last four years we have substantially increased our stocks of ammunition and other war consumables and the number of our tactical aircraft and helicopters to insure that our forces could be supported in combat for sustained periods of time. Since 1961 we have:
--Increased the number of tactical fighter squadrons by 44%.
--Increased the number of combat helicopters by 45%.
--Increased the bomb carrying capability of our tactical aircraft by 95%.
--Increased by 500% the number of sorties which our tactical fighters can fly with the modern ammunition in our inventories.
While our inventory for combat consumables, tactical aircraft and helicopters has been substantially increased, as the House Committee on Appropriations said on May 5 in reporting out the $700 million supplemental appropriation favorably, "a position of plenty--militarily--is to be desired in the light of world conditions."
To provide added insurance for our forces in Vietnam and to assure that we continue our "position of plenty," we intend to allocate the $700 million as follows:
Army Navy Air Force Total
Procurement of ammunition and ordnance $117.9 $135.9 $115.0 $368.8
Operation and maintenance expenses 46.6 56.2 49.8 152.6
Military construction projects 44.8 22.0 41.0 107.8
Procurement of aircraft 8.7 32.0 14.0 54.7
Other operating items 4.9 11.2 16.1

Total 218.0 251.0 231.0 700.0
Procurement Ammunition and Ordnance-$368.8 Million. Although the consumption rate of combat supplies in Vietnam is still quite small in relation to our current inventories and to projected deliveries from future production, we believe it is prudent at this time to replace the stocks now being consumed in order to ensure that the planned buildup of our war reserve inventories continues. Accordingly, the $368.8 million will be allocated to the procurement of those ammunition and ordnance items which are being consumed in Vietnam. Included in this category are 2.75 air-to-ground rockets, 7.62 mm and 20 mm cartridges, a variety of modern, aircraft-delivered bombs, aircraft flares and other illuminating devices, bomb racks, gun pods and ordnance handling equipment.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses--$152.6 Million. This money will be used to defray the costs of moving U.S. forces and their equipment and supplies to Vietnam and to support the increased overhaul and maintenance loads (including the procurement of additional spare parts) growing out of the more intensive use of and combat damage to aircraft and other equipment employed in Vietnam.
Military Construction Projects--$107.8 Million. This money will be devoted to the construction of additional facilities required to support the expansion of U.S. military forces in Southeast Asia and to protect our men and equipment there. Facilities must be provided for the growing number of U.S. military personnel in that area and warehouses, shops and repair facilities must be constructed for the supplies and equipment. Port facilities and airfields must be improved to accommodate the increased flow of materiel and the growing number of combat aircraft. Additional petroleum storage, transportation and dispensing facilities must be provided for the increased inventories of aircraft and the higher levels of operations. This money will also be used to construct hospitals to serve our men in South Vietnam.
Procurement of Aircraft--$54.7 Million. Aircraft attrition rates in Southeast Asia have been lower than the attrition rates during World War II and the Korean conflict and they are quite modest when compared with current inventories and production rates. Nevertheless, it would be prudent at this time to make the necessary preparations for higher production rates of selected aircraft should such production rates be required in the future. Accordingly, $54.7 million will be utilized for the procurement of long lead-time components for such aircraft as the UH-1B helicopter, the F-4 fighter/ bomber and the TA-4E fighter/bomber. The TA-4E aircraft are being procured to replace the A-4Es now being used by the Navy for training purposes. The acceleration of this program would release additional A-4Es for South Vietnam, if such aircraft are needed there.
Other Operating Items--$16.1 Million. The balance of the $700 million 16. 1 million--is required for a variety of other operating items, including some small, fast patrol boats, special tropical gear, communications equipment, etc.
The allocation of the $700 million as I have described will, in my judgment, fully meet our essential short-range needs. Nevertheless as you noted in your message to the Congress on May 4, no one can guarantee that "this will be the last request." I will continue to keep the situation in Vietnam under constant review and I will advise you of any additional needs in funds or equipment as soon as such needs arise. As you know, we have given our forces in South Vietnam first call on any of the resources of the Department of Defense.
ROBERT S. MCNAMARA