Lyndon B. Johnson
May 11, 1964

Remarks at the Presentation of the William Randolph Hearst foundation Journalism Awards
Mr. Hearst, ladies and gentlemen, honorees:
I am very happy that you could come here this morning. I was a college editor once but, as you can see, I did not do as well as you have done, so I did the next best thing and went into politics.
My experience is like the story of the young man whose father was asked how he made out on the exams. "Well," the father said, "he is doing much better. He was almost on top of the list of those who failed."
I am glad to be here with you young people on the top of the list of those who succeeded.
William Allen White once said that the newspaper is the embodiment of democracy. I guess this explains why newspapermen are so free in their advice about how to run the country.
Some one said the other day that I was seeing the press so much that they were worried about my overexposure. I am not sure whose overexposure they meant--mine or the press.
I enjoy seeing the press. I learn much from reporters. In the White House press. corps alone there are at least half a dozen experts already on animal husbandry.
It was Wendell Phillips who said that we live under a government of men and morning newspapers. Mr. Phillips apparently lived before there were afternoon news-

papers.
Thomas Jefferson pointed out that no government ought to be without censors. I can assure you, where the press is free, none will ever be needed.
So, all of us should be encouraged by these young people who are here this morning, because, as long as the press is free and young Americans like you pursue journalism as a profession, democracy will be free.
You have chosen a career in the national interest. You have begun a long and arduous journey that will require devotion and dedication. Above all, it will require a stubborn will to find, to interpret, and to explain the truth. No calling is more important and no task more influential, and no work more inspiring than that of a steward of the truth.
So I am very proud this morning at the suggestion of Mr. Hearst to come here to present these awards.
First, to Hal David Hall, first in the student competition.
Second, to Hal David Hall on behalf of the University of Tennessee.
Third, to Dean Norval Neil Luxon for the University of North Carolina.
Next, to lean Heller, second-place winner in the student competition.
Next, to Dr. George J. Kienzle for Ohio State University.
Now, congratulations to all of you, and I hope you will join us out here in the Rose Garden some of these days.
Note: The presentation ceremony was held at 11:30 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. The President's opening words referred to William Randolph Hearst, Jr., a trustee of the Hearst foundation. The foundation sponsors annually an intercollegiate competition in journalism, offering fellowship awards to qualifying students and making financial grants to universities.