Lyndon B. Johnson
May 19, 1967

Presidential Unit Citation Awarded to the 1st Squadron, 4th Cavalry, 1st Infantry Division, USA.
BY VIRTUE of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States I have today awarded
THE PRESIDENTIAL UNIT CITATION (ARMY) FOR EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM TO THE 1ST SQUADRON, 4TH CAVALRY, 1ST INFANTRY DIVISION
The 1st Squadron, 4th Cavalry, 1st Infantry Division distinguished itself by extraordinary heroism in connection with military operations against hostile forces in Birth Long Province, Republic of Vietnam during the period June to July 1966. On 8 June 1966, Troop A, 1st Squadron, 4th Cavalry was moving north along Highway 13 to the vicinity of An Loc to conduct area reconnaissance and offensive operations. The lead tank was hit by a command detonated mine which was the signal for three Viet Cong battalions to open a full-scale attack from both sides of the road. The three Viet Cong battalions occupied defensive fortifications and were heavily equipped with recoilless rifles, automatic weapons and a variety of small arms. Troop A immediately closed with the insurgent force in a fierce assault. Maneuver room was limited due to marshy terrain on either side of the highway. Continuous, multi-direction assaults were attempted by the desperate insurgent forces, but in each case they were halted by accurate tank, automatic, and individual weapons fire. With an indomitable fighting spirit, continuous fire and movement was used to steadily close on the insurgent force. The courageous fighting of the cavalrymen routed the Viet Cong from their emplacements. The gallant actions of Troop A in this six-hour battle was an eminent success. In addition, the armed helicopters of Troop D, 1st Squadron, 4th Cavalry, the supporting artillery, and Air Force fighter aircraft contributed immeasurably to the success of the battle by bringing devastating fire on the Viet Cong. The actions resulted in a count of 105 insurgents killed and a large number of Viet Cong weapons captured. On the morning of 30 June 1966, Troops B and C were conducting armed reconnaissance north of An Loc on Highway 13, when they were struck by a Viet Cong regiment. The insurgent force poured a volume of mortar, recoilless rifle and automatic weapons fire into the column from the front and two sides. Fire was immediately returned by the Squadron, engaging the Viet Cong at point-blank range. The insurgents, concealed next to the road, made repeated attempts to overrun the Squadron by use of hand grenades at close range, point-blank firing, and fanatical assaults. Maneuver by the cavalrymen was again severely hampered by dense brush and marshy soil and they were forced to conduct their fight from extremely vulnerable positions. Although four platoon leaders were killed or wounded in the first hour, the gallant stand of the cavalrymen resulted in total defeat of the hostile force, whose scattered survivors fled from the battlefield. On the morning of 9 July, the Squadron's B, C, and D troops deployed southwest of An Loc to lure the insurgents into contact. The reinforced Viet Cong regiment, again covered in the heavy growth along the road, launched a powerful attack under the cover of intense mortar, small arms, automatic weapons, and grenades and .50 caliber machine gun fire. The intensity of the threehour fight equaled the two earlier and longer engagements. The lack of proximate landing zones for the infantry delayed the planned reinforcement and required the Squadron to bear the entire force of the numerically superior insurgent force attack for two hours. The cavalrymen, with immediately responsive and continuous support by air and artillery, heroically stood their ground and broke the Viet Cong attack. The determination displayed by the 1st Squadron, 4th United States Cavalry during the three decisive battles of operation El Paso II resulted in significant victories. The Squadron's indomitable courage resulted in 712 confirmed hostile dead, an estimated 850 additional killed, and large quantities of captured weapons and equipment. The conspicuous gallantry and extraordinary heroism of the 1st Squadron, 4th Cavalry, 1st Infantry Division is in keeping with the finest traditions of the military service and reflects great credit upon all who participated in these significant battles.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON