Lyndon B. Johnson
May 27, 1967

Remarks at the Christening of the Aircraft Carrier U.S.S. John F. Kennedy.
Mrs. Kennedy, Caroline and John, Mrs. Joseph Kennedy, Senators Kennedy and other members of the Kennedy family, Secretary McNamara, Secretary Nitze, Mr. Holden, distinguished platform guests, ladies and gentlemen:
In March 1943, almost a quarter of a century ago, a young naval lieutenant assumed his first command--a tiny PT boat--and sailed intrepidly into the savage battle for the Solomons.
Next year 5,000 Americans will put to sea in this giant ship named John F. Kennedy, for whom the voyage of destiny began in the Solomons and ended tragically at the pinnacle of national affection and respect, the Presidency of the United States.
This is the third carrier since the end of the Second World War to bear the name of a man. Carriers are normally named for famous battles, or great ships of the past. Its only companions are named for Franklin Delano Roosevelt and James V. Forrestal.
And this is highly appropriate because these three singular men had a great deal in common:
--Each of them died in the service of his country.
--Each of them understood that, whatever the risk, men must defend freedom, the leaven in the bread of life that alone makes true peace possible.
--Each of them believed--in John Kennedy's moving words--
It is the fate of this generation... to live with a struggle we did not start, in a world we did not make. But the pressures of life are not always distributed by choice. And while no nation has ever been faced by such a challenge, no nation has ever been so ready to seize the burden and glory of freedom."
To face that challenge, John Kennedy knew, took strength as well as idealism. He knew it as a student who saw the failure of appeasement in the 1930's; he knew it as a naval officer in the South Pacific he knew it as President of the United States.
Because John Kennedy understood that strength is essential to sustain freedom, because he recognized that we cannot afford to mark time or stand in place, he requested' funds for this carrier from the Congress in 1963.
In the year 2000--and beyond--this majestic ship that we christen here today may still be sailing the oceans of the world. We pray that her years will be years of peace. But if she must fight, both the flag she flies and the name she bears will carry a profound message to friend and foe alike.
For the 5,000 Americans who will man this great ship--and for all their countrymen, whose hopes ride with them--this is a moment of reflection.
Today, as throughout our history, we bear fateful responsibilities in the world. From the moment of our national creation, American ideals have served as a beacon to the oppressed and to the enslaved.
In times past, it has often been our strength and our resolve which have tipped the scales of conflict against aggressors, or would-be aggressors. That role has never been an easy one. It has always required not only strength, but patience--the incredible courage to wait where waiting is appropriate, to avoid disastrous results to shortcut history. And sacrifice--the tragic price we pay for our commitment to our ideals.
No President understood this Nation's historic role and purpose better than John F. Kennedy. No man knew more deeply the burdens of that role. And no man ever gave more.
Let this ship we christen in his name be a testament that his countrymen have not forgotten.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 11:58 a.m. at Newport News, Va. In his opening words he referred to Mrs. John F. Kennedy, her children Caroline, who christened the carrier, and John F. Kennedy, Jr., Mrs. Joseph P. Kennedy, mother of the late President, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze, and Donald Holden, president of the Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company. During his remarks he referred to James V. Forrestal, who served as Secretary of the Navy under President Franklin D. Roosevelt and later as Secretary of Defense.