Lyndon B. Johnson
May 30, 1964

Message to President de Valera.
To President Eamon de Valera:
As you leave the United States, I want to tell you how very much Mrs. Johnson and I enjoyed your visit and how pleased we were to have you as our guest.
It must be clear to you, Mr. President, from the reception you received everywhere, the deep affection with which you are held here in America--your second home.
You are at once a legend and a warm friend. Your public career encompasses the history of modern Ireland to such an extent that you are not only its leading representative; you are also its personification, with all the pride, charm, courage and understanding that are associated with Ireland and its people.
Under your wise leadership, Ireland not only regained her freedom and independence; it has become a distinguished member of the community of nations, dedicated to the causes of independence, freedom and peace.
As close friends, we have watched with admiration your impressive progress in making Ireland a prosperous and modern state. And as good international neighbors, we have valued deeply your country's contribution to the main stream of international developments--your cooperation in the United Nations, your contribution in the Congo, your help in Cyprus. Indeed, peoples around the world join your millions of admirers in Ireland and in America to count your name among the thoughtful, benign and .progressive influences, striving to make this a better and more peaceful world.
Again, Mr. President, let me say how pleased and honored we were to have you here. Our only regret is that Mrs. de Valera was unable to join you.
Mrs. Johnson joins me in wishing you a very pleasant journey home and in sending you and Mrs. de Valera our abiding good wishes for your health and happiness.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The message, released at Austin, Tex., was sent to President de Valera at the John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York just before he departed for Ireland.