Lyndon B. Johnson
May 13, 1965

Remarks to the National Review Board for the East-West Center.
Members of the Congress, members of the Board, ladies and gentlemen .'
We hear of wars and rumors of wars, but too often the clod and steady work of achieving peace goes unnoticed in this world in which we live.
Yet, to me and to this country, there is nothing that really matters more than working toward peace, trying as best we can to replace strife and suspicion with respect and with understanding between men.
So, it is a very special, personal pleasure for me to come here and meet with you distinguished people this evening, who are working so hard and so long to create understanding-better understanding--in the world.
It was more than 5 years ago, when I was in the Senate, that I sponsored the legislation which established the East-West Center.
This is almost the holiday of the anniversary of when I made the speech on May 9, 1961, and dedicated the Center at Honolulu. I said at that time, and I want to quote: "The ultimate defense of freedom lies not in weapons systems nor in the implements of arms. These we must maintain. But freedom's surest defense, and freedom's greatest force is the enlightenment of the minds of all of the people. Arms can never make us invulnerable, nor our enemies invincible, but the support that we give to education can make freedom irresistible."
The East-West Center is helping to prove the truth of that statement every day. After only 4 years of operation it has already sent young men and young women back to their homelands equipped with new knowledge to aid in the development of their nations. More than 1,500 scholars, trainees, senior specialists from throughout Asia, the Pacific, and the United States have benefited from this program and have profited from its conferences.
Hundreds of persons from East to West have worked together at the Center to share and to exchange and to enlarge their knowledge. And we, of this great land of ours, are privileged to be part of and to be close to both the West and the East--the Atlantic and the Pacific. While our ties are old and many with the Atlantic world, Americans have always had an interest and an appreciation and a very great aspiration for the peoples of the land of the Pacific.
Only 4 years ago this week, I was visiting in those lands of southeast Asia and I was going down their highways and byways, and their streets, visiting as Vice President. There was danger then as there is danger now, but I came away then greatly inspired by the people and by their faith.
In all that I do here now, and in all that we do as a great nation, I pray that we may work with those peoples, that we may be able somehow, someway, to help them a little bit to realize their dreams of peace, and prosperity, and freedom.
Our languages may differ, our cultures do vary, but I hold to the belief that East and West share a common destiny, and that destiny is freedom.
So, I welcome this chance this evening to meet with these distinguished members of the National Review Board to discuss the Center's future.
I want to especially thank Congressman Rooney and Governor Burns, both of whom have been my friends throughout the years, whose interests and whose energy have helped to build and to sustain this great East-West Center.
I want to thank all the Members of the Congress, of both parties, who worked so valiantly and so dedicatedly to help us bring the Center into fruition.
In a world of danger and potential destruction all of you, particularly the members of this Board and the Members of the Congress here this evening, are contributing to a most noble work.
Earlier in the day I gave my views on some of the things we have done to make life better and happier for the people of that area of the world. In the days to come I hope that it will be our constant goal and always our determined view that what we have must be shared with others so that all of us can live in a world ultimately of peace, of friendship, and of a reasonable and decent standard of living for all humankind, wherever you live, whatever its religion, whatever the color of its skin, whatever area of the world they may exist.
So thank you very much for coming here. Please pardon me for delaying you.
Note: The President spoke at 6:35 p.m. in the Fish Room at the White House. During his remarks he referred to Representative John J. Rooney of New York and Governor Haydon Burns of Florida.