Lyndon B. Johnson
May 23, 1964

Remarks Upon Arrival at the Airport, Roanoke, Virginia.
Ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls, Senator Byrd:
I am very thankful to you for the courtesy that you have extended us in coming out here and meeting us. Senator Byrd and I were flying down talking with each other and we concluded that there were a good many things we agreed upon, particularly two things: one, he agreed with me that we ought to cut the lights out at the White House, keep down our light bill; and he also agreed that the people of Roanoke were a wonderful group. So we have no dispute on those two questions.
This is a delightful day for us. We are coming to Virginia to celebrate the achievements of a great man, and to honor a former Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense who has provided great leadership to libertyloving people throughout the world, General George Marshall. We are going over to see this historic and wonderful school, VMI, and we are pleased that we have a chance to stop here and look you in the face and shake your hand.
I should like for you to meet some other members of my party. First, I want you to know Mrs. Johnson, Lady Bird.
[After brief remarks by Mrs. Johnson the President resumed speaking. ]
I know he is bashful and modest, but I know he will appreciate having a chance to at least wave his hand at you. I want you to know one of the great men of our time, the senior Senator from Virginia, my old longtime friend, Harry Byrd.
And next, the distinguished Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk; the distinguished former Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Acheson; my friend the Secretary of Agriculture, Mr. Orville freeman; the distinguished Secretary of Commerce, my friend Luther Hodges; the very able Under Secretary of State, Mr. Averell Harriman.
And now I want to present the Congressmen--Congressman Everett, Congressman Downing, Congressman Fulton, Congressman Jennings, and Congressman Marsh. Then Mrs. Hodges, Mrs. Freeman, Mrs. Acheson, and Mrs. Harriman; and Senator and Mrs. Monroney from the great State of Oklahoma.
Thank you so much for coming out. We will have a chance to come by the fence and say hello to you. We appreciate your friendship so very much.
Note: The President spoke at Woodrum field, Roanoke, Va. In his opening words he referred to Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia. Later he referred to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, former Secretary of State and Mrs. Dean Acheson, Secretary of Agriculture and Mrs. Orville freeman, Secretary of Commerce and Mrs. Luther H. Hodges, Under Secretary of State and Mrs. W. Averell Harriman, Representatives Robert A. Everett and Richard H. Fulton of Tennessee, Thomas N. Downing, W. Pat Jennings, and John O. Marsh of Virginia, and Senator and Mrs. A. S. Monroney of Oklahoma.