Lyndon B. Johnson
May 19, 1965

Letter in Response to Report on the Second National Conference of Federal Executive Board Chairmen.
Dear Mr. Chairman:
I appreciate your report on the recent Conference of Federal Executive Board Chairmen and Washington officials. From your comments I judge the Conference to be two days well spent in exploring ways to cut costs and in paving the way for the effective implementation of new programs.
I am gratified that the briefings by key Administration officials gave the participants deeper insights into the dimensions of the programs enacted by Congress in the fight against poverty, against discrimination, and against inadequate education. The opportunity for interagency cooperation and coordination was never greater--or more necessary.
There can be no letup in our War on Waste. The Federal executive must set the pace for the employees and supervisors in his organization. Not only must each manager search out new ways to improve operations, but managers must coordinate their efforts to eliminate duplication and provide greater efficiency.
These are matters of national urgency and of the highest priority. From past experience, and the note of high resolve on which the meeting ended, I look to the Federal Executive Boards for their full support in facilitating the implementation of new programs and for significant contributions for greater economy.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[Honorable John W. Macy, Jr., Chairman, Civil Service Commission, Washington, D.C.]
Note: The report of John W. Macy, Jr., Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, on the second national conference of Federal Executive Board Chairmen, held in Washington May 3-4, was in the form of a 1- page letter to the President, also released.
In his letter Mr. Macy stated that the 12 Chairmen had met with top Washington officials from 31 departments and agencies having Federal Executive Board representation in the field. The conference objectives were, he stated, to brief them on programs of special Presidential interest, to review and evaluate progress, and to explore ways and means of improving cooperation and coordination.
"The sense of urgency you have about the Government serving all the people and the dimensions of new governmental programs were communicated by key officials of the Administration. Sargent Shriver gave an overview of the Economic Opportunity Act and W. Willard Wirtz presented the Labor Department's role for implementing the Economic Opportunity Act. Ramsey Clark covered Civil Rights and Francis Keppel briefed the group on the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
"Kermit Gordon made a hard hitting presentation on management improvement and cost reduction. A joint GSA-BOB team presentation focused on decreasing costs through combined services for Federal agencies. Against this background, the conferees shared experiences and ideas on cooperative action that left no doubt about their commitment to the War on Waste."