Lyndon B. Johnson
May 03, 1965

Statement by the President on Approving a Program To Find Summer Jobs for Young People.
I HAVE today approved a major antipoverty program proposed by the Secretary of Labor to provide needed summer jobs for 70,000 disadvantaged young people. About $40 million will be allocated for this program.
The summer school vacation period just ahead of us is a crucial time for thousands of young men and women. They will be looking for a chance to earn the money that will mean the difference to them between returning to school in the fall or dropping into the oblivion of the jobless.
Through the summer Neighborhood Youth Corps program developed by Secretary Wirtz, both rural and urban jobs are planned for unemployed and needy youth who must earn their own way. These projects will enable them to complete their high school educations or get work experience that will help them bridge the gap between school and a job.
One of the rural programs will have conservation work-crews of young people working in parks and forests throughout the Nation. This program will improve, conserve, and develop public parks and forests for the benefit of all Americans as well as members of the local community.
With the cooperation of the Department of Agriculture, the Neighborhood Youth Corps has contacted every State in the Nation concerning this summer program. Thus far 27 States have indicated a desire to participate.
Other rural types of programs will include work in the reclamation and beautification of rural recreational facilities, the conservation and development of soil and water resources, and with land-grant colleges.
Summer programs for youths in urban areas will include work as city park aides, playground assistants, clerical aides, teacher aides in the summer school session, hospital aides, nursery aides in day care centers, and other similar jobs.
Poverty takes no summer vacation. Therefore, I am asking Secretary of Labor Wirtz to activate this program by May 15 so that students starting their summer vacations in early June will have an opportunity to start work almost immediately.
This new Neighborhood Youth Corps program, together with the 245 already approved, means help for over 188,000 young people. This is an auspicious beginning.