Lyndon B. Johnson
May 27, 1965

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 5 of 1965: National Science Foundation
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 5 of 1965, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended, and providing for certain reorganizations relating to the National Science Foundation.
The plan contains two reorganization measures. First, all committees provided for in section 8 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 would be abolished. That section provides that there shall be a committee for each division of the Foundation, having not less than five members who are appointed by the National Science Board for two-year terms. Section 8, as affected by section 23(b) (3) of Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1962 (76 Stat. 1255), directs each such committee to make recommendations to and advise and consult with the Director of the National Science Foundation with respect to matters relating to the program of its division. Originally the Foundation had three such committees, corresponding to its three divisions. With the growth of the Foundation, five additional divisions have been established; consequently the Foundation, in accordance with the requirements of section 8, now has eight divisional committees. This multiplication in the number of committees has proved cumbersome. For example, three committees are now concerned with scientific personnel and education matters instead of the original one committee, even though one committee is all that is required to meet the Foundation's needs in this area. The elimination of the various statutory divisional committees will simplify the structure of the Foundation and improve its administration.
The second reorganization measure contained in the accompanying reorganization plan would empower the Director of the National Science Foundation to delegate functions vested in him by law or delegated to him by the National Science Board. The expanding responsibilities of the Foundation and the Director indicate that it is necessary that the Director clearly have such authority.
Upon the taking effect of the reorganization plan, the National Science Foundation will institute such new arrangements, in lieu of the divisional committees now required by law, as it deems appropriate. Such new arrangements may include the establishment of committees under section 6 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 and such other devices for obtaining advice as may be available to the Foundation.
After investigation, I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in the reorganization plan transmitted herewith is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2(a) Of the Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended.
The reorganization plan will permit more effective management of the affairs of the National Science Foundation. It is, however, impracticable to specify or itemize at this time the reductions of expenditures which it is probable will be brought about by the taking effect of the reorganizations included in the reorganization plan.
The statutory authority for the exercise of certain functions which would be abolished by section 1 of the reorganization plan is contained in section 8 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 152.
I recommend that the Congress allow the reorganization plan to become effective.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: Reorganization Plan 5 of 1965 is published in the Federal Register (30 F.R. 9355). It became effective on July 27, 1965.