Lyndon B. Johnson
May 31, 1967

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report on Special International Exhibitions.
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to transmit the Fourth Annual Report on Special International Exhibitions conducted during fiscal year 1966 under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961.
The primary purpose of the program--in which the Nation's economic, social and cultural achievements are exhibited in international fairs and expositions--is to build bridges of understanding between the United States and other countries of the world. Each exhibit is designed to show how our accomplishments relate to the capabilities and aspirations of the different countries. Because the exhibitions feature the products of American industries, they also contribute to mutually profitable trade relationships.
Since the program began in 1954, more than 100 million people--primarily in Eastern Europe and the developing countries--have witnessed 176 exhibits designed to help them understand, appreciate and benefit from American progress and experience.
During fiscal year 1966, the United States participated in a broad range of international events:
--Trade Fair Exhibitions in Algeria, Ethiopia, Hungary, Iraq, Poland, Tunisia and Yugoslavia. These exhibitions dramatized our progress in mechanical equipment for farm and industry, educational techniques, electronics and space.
--"Expo 67". During the year, plans were laid for our participation in the World's Fair which opened in Montreal, Canada, in April 1967. "Creative America" was chosen as the theme of this country's exhibit, which pictures American achievements in the arts and space technology.
--Labor Exhibits at Trade Fairs in Ethiopia, Hungary, Iraq, Poland and Yugoslavia. The purpose of these exhibits was to project the true image of the American worker and the role he plays in the affairs of this Nation.
--Special-Purpose "East West" Exhibits in the Soviet Union, Hungary, Poland and Yugoslavia. More than 2 million persons attended these exhibits, which featured the machinery of American industry, American architecture and the graphic arts.
As in past years, the program's effectiveness was the result not only of Government efforts, but also of the contribution of materials, time and talent by hundreds of private firms.
All Americans are indebted to them for their efforts to help carry America's message to the world.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

May 31, 1967
Note: The report, entitled "Special International Exhibitions, Fourth Annual Report, 1966 (Report of the United States Information Agency)," was issued by the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, Department of State (45 pp.).