Lyndon B. Johnson
November 23, 1966

Remarks at a Press Briefing at the LBJ Ranch
MRS. JOHNSON is going to accompany some of the people of the space program into the living room to have their coffee. I thought instead of suggesting that you come back later in the day, I would tell you of our conferences with the other departmental people this morning and give you an opportunity, as one of you very discreetly put it yesterday, to take a whack at them while they are here.
At about 9:25 this morning Mr. McCloy, Secretary Rusk, Mr. McNamara, and Mr. Rostow arrived at the ranch and we spent until almost 12 o'clock discussing the tripartite talks that Mr. McCloy had been representing our Government in, and reviewing the results of his conversations.
Subsequently, I conferred briefly with Secretary Rusk and Secretary McNamara about matters relating to our other problems in other parts of the world, South Vietnam, our defense structure, our appropriation budget plans, and so forth.
There are really not any hard announcements to come out of these meetings. They will be continuing, as you know, until the first of the year. However, I thought, consistent with our general policy, where we can, that I would like to ask Secretary Rusk to make a brief statement, at the conclusion of which he will take any questions you may want to ask to clarify what he says, or any others you may want to present to him.
Then Secretary McNamara and Mr. McCloy will speak before you go to the Press Center and before we go to lunch.
Note: The President spoke at 12:20 p.m. at the LBJ Ranch in Johnson City, Texas. In the course of his remarks he referred to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President, and John J. McCloy, U.S. Representative to the trilateral meetings held by the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the United Kingdom.
Following the President's remarks, Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, and Mr. McCloy spoke with the newsmen and responded to questions. The text of their remarks is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 2, p. 1719).