Lyndon B. Johnson
November 01, 1965

Memorandum Announcing a New Drive To Improve the Government's Services to the Public
Memorandum for Heads of Departments and Agencies
The task of government is to serve the public. It has been my deep and continuing concern to assure that each American receives from his Government the fastest, most efficient and most courteous service. As our society grows more complex and our population expands we must explore every path in our quest to provide the best possible service for our individual citizens.
Some months ago I asked Chairman Macy of the Civil Service Commission to survey our existing practices and to suggest ways to improve our efforts. He has reported that progress has been made. But we must continue to forge ahead, for in a real sense we have only begun.
The time for action is now. This is particularly so in view of the new programs recently passed by Congress which reach all of our people.
I am today placing Chairman Macy in charge of a new and concerted government drive aimed at bringing better service to our individual citizens. I am directing him to coordinate the activities of each department and agency and to report to me every 90 days on our progress to improve the quality of service and to make the government more accessible to the people it serves.
To build further on the steps we have already taken, I am requesting:
First, that you assign a top member of your staff to develop within your Department or Agency a program to improve the quality of service to the public. The name of the official you select should be promptly forwarded to Chairman Macy.
Second, that you report to Chairman Macy by December 15, 1965 the steps taken in your Department or Agency to improve the quality of service and your plans for future improvement.
Third, that your agency take full advantage of the new and special training courses developed by the Civil Service Commission to improve standards of service to open up more lines of communication to the public.
I regard this as a vital undertaking. As our programs expand and increase, it is essential that each of our citizens receive prompt, efficient and courteous service and from each of our government employees.
We must have your personal support and leadership to translate the promise of a better and more responsive government into a reality.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: On November 1, 1965, the White House made public a progress report to the President from John W. Macy, Jr., Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, on improving the Government's services to the public (I Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 447). The report, announcing that in 20 departments and agencies a high level official had been assigned to lead the campaign to improve the organization's communications and contacts with the public, stated in part:
"To improve service to the public, some departments are consolidating field offices to provide 'one stop' service; others have centralized their general information service to make it easier for the public to get the help it needs. Several departments and agencies have extended their office hours in Washington and in other localities to give better service to the public.
"To help Federal agencies further improve the ability of their employees to communicate clearly and responsively and to better serve the public, the Civil Service Commission has taken a number of steps:
"--We have developed new training programs to improve the standards of the Government's communications and public contact.
"--We have developed a new test of writing ability as a part of our important Federal Service Entrance Examination.
"--As a part of our inspection program, we will look to see what agencies are doing to improve their communications and services, and we will evaluate the efforts made.
"--We are preparing a fact leaflet to go to each employee expressing your personal interest in improved communications, enlisting employee support, and outlining what they can do to help.
"--We have developed a new incentive program for excellence in communications and service to the public and have urged agencies to make awards to their employees for outstanding achievement.
"--We have asked the Chairman of each Federal Executive Board to take action to improve communications and service and to encourage interagency action along these lines.
"--We have begun an interchange of information among agencies on new ideas and methods to improve communications and service."
The memorandum was released at Austin, Tex.