Lyndon B. Johnson
November 29, 1967

Statement by the President on the Completion of the Agency for International Development Program in Iran.
TODAY American and Iranian hands join in mutual congratulations. We mark a great success.
It may seem strange that we celebrate when an enterprise goes out of business. It may seem odd that we are pleased that the American AID mission that has long channeled much of America's economic assistance to Iran will close its doors tomorrow.
But we are celebrating an achievement-not an ending. This is a milestone in Iran's continuing progress and in our increasingly close relations.
What we mark today is Iran's success. What we celebrate is Iran's economic and social progress. What we honor are the effective work of the men and women of Iran and the enlightened and progressive leadership of His Majesty the Shah.
In 1962, I visited Iran and saw its farms, cities, and schools when Iran was on the doorstep of its reform program.
Just 3 months ago, I had the pleasure of hearing from the Shah himself of Iran's progress in land reform and its drive against illiteracy; its far-reaching development program and emphasis on private investment; and its many other vital reforms. That story is impressive.
What is even more impressive is Iran's impatience with ways no longer useful--and yet its respect for traditions of the past and its willingness to face hard decisions and to do those difficult things necessary for a better future.
We are glad that we have been able, in an important way, to assist in Iran's rapid strides forward. Our commitment to Iran's progress has been enthusiastically given and of long standing.

Since the dark years following World War II we have moved from emergency economic support to exciting development efforts which have now paid visible dividends. Careful joint planning has had much to do with the success we mark today.
We cannot depart one era without looking toward another that lies ahead. The similarity of needs and mutuality of purpose that Iran and the United States have long shared do not stop simply because Iran's well-being enables it to shoulder greater burdens.
Now is the time when even stronger ties become possible.
We will turn our hands now to new fields of cooperation. Exchanges in science and technology, expanded business relationships, continued cooperation in development and a common determination to work for peace and security--these are but a few of the ways in which Americans and Iranians will phrase their new plans for cooperation.
With one milestone behind us, we begin planting for a new harvest of friendship, trust, and shared hopes.