Lyndon B. Johnson
October 02, 1964

Remarks at the Final Meeting of the Alaska Reconstruction Planning Commission.
Senator Anderson, members of the Commission:
As you hold your final meeting at the White House, I want to say: well done.
On March 27 the first reports from Alaska made clear what the subsequent reports confirmed. There was a big job to do-and we would need our best men to help our countrymen in Alaska start forward to get it done. I asked one of the best men I knew--one of the most able and dedicated public servants in America--to lead that effort: Senator Clinton Anderson of New Mexico.
I know how much I was asking of him-and of each of you. But I think I thought more of his personal interests than Clint Anderson did. He responded immediately and enthusiastically--and all of you have worked with this same spirit every step of the way.
On behalf of the Nation, I congratulate you. On behalf of the people of Alaska, I thank you.
When the earthquake struck last spring, all American hearts went out to Alaska. All of us feel a special pride in our largest State. We are proud Alaska's star shines from our flag--and we want very much to see Alaska grow and thrive and increase her strength.
When tragedy befalls strong people, greater strength usually emerges on the other side. I believe this is the case for Alaska. Certainly, the tragedy of the great earthquake has drawn us all closer together-and given to Alaska the new strength of new interest, new confidence, and new understanding from all her sister States.
The work of reconstruction in Alaska is well launched.
Water service has been restored throughout the earthquake region.
The Alaska Railroad is operating normally in most areas. Limited service is available on the balance of the system.
Practically all highways are fully operational--although much work remains to be done.
Design of port facilities has been completed. It will be possible to provide some protection for boats this winter.
The Small Business Administration has approved nearly $50 million in loans to homeowners and businessmen--under very favorable terms.
The Congress has enacted legislation providing grants to offset State and local revenue losses. Other forms of disaster assistance have been provided--much of it entirely without precedent. Any dollars and cents values on Federal assistance would be misleading. The point is that we are determined to do what needs to be done to meet the needs of this great State.
For what has been done thus far, credit is due many. The State of Alaska, the local communities there, Alaska's fine delegation to the Congress--and the people of Alaska themselves--are the heroes of this effort. And I am proud to salute them.
Our next step must be forward--toward a broader and better future for the State. I have taken action today toward that end.
I have signed an Executive order establishing a new Federal Field Committee in Alaska to cooperate with a similar body established by the Governor of Alaska. The purpose is to prepare practical, long-range plans for Alaska's economic development.
The order establishes also a President's Review Committee for Development Planning in Alaska. The Chairman will be the Secretary of Commerce. This committee will provide general direction to the field committee--and will advise me concerning the field committee's recommendations. The Director of the Office of Emergency Planning will have responsibility for coordinating and expediting the reconstruction program.
You of this Commission have no doubts-nor do I--about Alaska's future. Our last great land frontier will grow and prosper far beyond past expectations or present hopes.
You who have served on this Commission will always be able to look to the North and take a measure of personal pride in having been part of this great work.
Note: The President spoke at 11 :40 a.m. in the Fish Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Senator Clinton P. Anderson of New Mexico who served as Chairman of the Federal Reconstruction and Development Planning Commission for Alaska (see Item 241, note). Earlier in the day the President issued Executive Order 11182 (29 F.R. 13629, 3 CFR, 1964 Supp.) establishing a Federal Field Committee for Development Planning in Alaska and the President's Review Committee for Development Planning in Alaska. The order also abolished the Federal Reconstruction and Development Planning Commission for Alaska established on April 2, 1964.
As printed, this item follows the prepared text released by the White House.