Lyndon B. Johnson
October 17, 1966

Executive Order 11314—Creating a Board of Inquiry to Report on Certain Labor Disputes Affecting the Military Jet Engine Industry, Military Aircraft Industry, Military Armament Industry and Military Electronics Industry of the United States
WHEREAS, there have existed certain labor disputes between General Electric Company and certain of its employees represented by: International Union of Electrical Radio and Machine Workers, AFL-CIO; International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, AFL-CIO; International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America, AFL-CIO; International Union, Allied Industrial Workers of America, AFL-CIO; International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, AFL-CIO; Sheet Metal Workers' International Association, AFL-CIO; American Federation of Technical Engineers, AFL-CIO; American Flint Glass Workers' Union of North America, AFL-CIO; United Electrical Radio and Machine Workers of America; Unittil ANuciation of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of the United States and Canada, AFL-CIO; United Steelworkers of America, AFL-CIO; International Union of Operating Engineers, AFL-CIO; International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and Helpers of America; Pattern Makers' League of North America, AFL-CIO; International Brotherhood of Firemen and Oilers, AFL-CIO; Syracuse Draftsmens Union; and
WHEREAS, although a tentative resolution of these disputes was arrived at by the parties, or some of them, nevertheless there is a strike at the Evendale, Ohio, plant of General Electric Company by Local No. 647 of the International Union of the United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America, AFL—CIO, and Locals 34 and 912 of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace workers, AFL— CIO, and there exists a threat that there will be further strikes at General Electric Company plants by one or more of the aforesaid international unions or local units thereof; and
WHEREAS, the existing strike at the Evendale, Ohio, plant of General Electric Company will, in my opinion, if permitted to continue, affect a substantial part of the military jet engine industry, which industry is engaged in trade, commerce, transportation, transmission, or communication among the several states or with foreign nations, or engaged in the production of goods for commerce, and which strike, if permitted to continue, will imperil the national safety; and
WHEREAS, threatened strikes at other General Electric Company plants will, in my opinion, if allowed to occur, affect a substantial part of the military jet engine industry, military aircraft industry, military armament industry and military electronics industry, which industries are engaged in trade, commerce, transportation, transmission, or communication among the several states or with foreign nations, or engaged in the production of goods for commerce, and which threatened strikes, if permitted to occur, will imperil the national safety;
NOW THEREFORE by virtue of the authority vested in me by Section 206 of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947 (61 Stat. 155 ; 29 U.S.C. 176), I hereby create a Board of Inquiry, consisting of Mr. David L. Cole, Chairman, Mr. John Dunlop and Mr. Jacob Seidenberg, whom I appoint to inquire into the issues involved in these disputes.
The Board shall have powers and duties as set forth in Title II of such Act. The Board shall report to the President in accordance with the provisions of Section 206 of such Act. With respect to the dispute giving rise to the strike at Evendale, Ohio, plant it shall report on or before October 18th, 1966, and with respect to the dispute or disputes resulting in any other such strike, it shall report as soon as possible.
Upon the submission of its report or reports, the Board shall continue in existence to perform such other functions as may be required under such Act.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
The White House
October 17, 1966.