Lyndon B. Johnson
October 03, 1968

Statement by the President Upon Designating Members of a Science Mission to Australia
In relating science and technology to the fruitful development of its great continent, Australia encounters many of the same problems that confront the United States in meeting national needs and objectives. Closer cooperation will advance the state of science to the mutual benefit of both countries. I hope that the talented science communities of our two countries will also find ways together to promote the application of science and technology to national and regional development for the benefit of neighboring countries in Asia and the Pacific area.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House press release announcing that Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President and Director of the Office of Science and Technology, would lead a science mission to Australia October 9-16, 1968, as part of an arrangement made by President Johnson and Prime Minister John G. Cotton of Australia during the latter's visit to Washington in May 1968. The Presidential mission, the release added, would be the guests of the Australian Minister of Education and Science and would meet in Australia with leading scientists, educators, industrialists, and Government officials. The release concluded that Dr. Hornig would be accompanied by his wife, Dr. Lilli Hornig, Head of the Department of Chemistry, Trinity College, Washington, D.C., and by the following persons: Nyle C. Brady, former Director of Science and Education, Department of Agriculture (presently Director of Research, New York State College of Agriculture, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y.); Lewis M. Branscomb, member of the President's Science Advisory Committee, and Chairman, Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colo.; Philip Handler, Chairman, National Science Board, and Chairman, Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, N.C.; James A. Shannon, former Director of the National Institutes of Health, and Special Adviser to the President, National Academy of Sciences; Robert M. White, Administrator, Environmental Science Services Administration, Department of Commerce; Daniel F. Margolies, Office of Science and Technology; and Walter S. Baer, Office of Science and Technology.