Lyndon B. Johnson
October 14, 1966

Remarks Upon Signing Documents Implementing Agreements Relating to International Movement of Cultural, Scientific, and Educational Materials.
A LITTLE OVER a year ago in my speech at the Smithsonian bicentennial celebration, I pledged that we would embark on a new and noble adventure: the adventure of international education. One of the five central tasks of this adventure will be "to increase the free flow of books and ideas, works of art, of science and imagination."
Today I am happy, with the full support of Congress, to announce that we are taking three major steps forward in fulfilling this task.
I am today signing a proclamation that announces our formal acceptance of the audio-visual Agreement of Beirut. This final step is now possible because last Saturday, October the 8th, I signed a joint resolution of Congress to bring our tariff laws into conformity with this treaty. Today I am issuing an Executive order that designates the United States Information Agency to carry out the Beirut Agreement for this Government.
The Beirut Agreement removes import duties and every other barrier to the international movement of educational materials of the type called "audio-visual," classroom motion pictures, slides, video tapes, recordings, and the like.
Our exports of these educational materials is growing at the present annual level of $3.5 million. I feel confident that our acceptance of this Beirut Agreement will soon bring a doubling in the number of nations-there are now 18--which are full partners to the agreement. I believe it will increase many times the volume of American educational tools flowing abroad.
I also signed today a bill to implement the agreement on the importation of educational, scientific, and cultural materials commonly known as the Florence Agreement.
Through this legislation, the United States now joins with 51 other countries in dropping tariff barriers that have limited the free access of nations to all the tools of learning, including books and scientific instruments, which other nations create.
The United States helped negotiate this agreement in 1950. I believe Ambassador Allen negotiated this agreement almost 18 years ago. The Senate ratification followed in 1960.
We have been successful, finally, in obtaining action by the 89th Congress which will permit full U.S. participation in this multinational effort.
I have also signed an Executive order facilitating art exchanges with foreign countries. This is under authority given me by the 89th Congress.
I am designating the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Smithsonian Institution, as the responsible person to allow art works to come into this country for exhibition.
Because of the limitations of time, I am asking Mr. Cater to give those of you who are interested in the arts a background briefing following this signing, if you care to have one. We will not detain the people here.
I am particularly pleased that we take these steps in the year of UNESCO's 20th anniversary. The ideals for which that organization stands are being given fresh vitality and renewed purpose. I hope they will command the support of all forward-looking, enlightened citizens without regard to partisanship.
We know that knowledge has no national boundaries; that the instruments of learning should be fully and freely accessible to all. We know that ideas, not armaments, will shape our lasting prospects for peace.
Note: The President spoke at 11:15 a.m. in his office at the White House. During his remarks he referred to George V. Allen, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs 1948-1950, who also served as U.S. Ambassador to Iran, Yugoslavia, India, and Greece; Dean Rusk, Secretary of State; and S. Douglass Cater, Special Assistant to the President.
The proclamation announcing formal acceptance of the Beirut Agreement is printed as part of the Agreement in - United States Treaties and Other International Agreements (17 UST 1578). The joint resolution implementing the Agreement, approved by the President on October 8, is Public Law 89-634 (80 Stat. 879). Executive Order 11311 "Carrying Out Provisions of the Beirut Agreement of 1948 Relating to Audio-Visual Materials" designated the United States Information Agency as the agency to carry out the provisions of the Agreement and related protocol (2 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 1482; 31 F.R. 13413; 3 CFR, 1966 Comp., p. 161).
As enacted, the bill (H.R. 8664) implementing the Florence Agreement is Public Law 89-651 (80 Slat. 897).
The President also referred to Executive Order 11312 "Designating the Secretary of State to Perform Functions Relating to Certain Objects of Cub rural Significance Imported into the United States for Temporary Display or Exhibition" (2 Weekly Comp. Pres. Does., p. 1482; 31 F.R. 13415; 3 CFR, 1966 Comp., p. 162).
For the President's remarks at the Smithsonian Institution on September 16, 1965, see 1965 volume, this series, Book II, Item 519.
As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.