Lyndon B. Johnson
October 06, 1966

Remarks at a Farewell Ceremony Honoring Former Under Secretary of State George W. Ball.
I TAKE PART in a great many ceremonies, from tree-plantings to full-dress presidential inaugurals. But it seems that Government protocol makes no formal provision for an occasion like tonight's--a "swearing-out" ceremony.
There should be some appropriate ceremony for observing the moment when a good man lays down the burdens he has carried so long and so well.
To us who know and have worked with George Ball, there is no need to review his career. We know how he has distinguished himself in dozens of critical and sensitive situations. We know him also as a man who, probably more than any other American, has devoted himself to the idea of European unity and a more effective Atlantic partnership.
A few days after I took office, I told George Ball and his associates in the State Department that I would be looking to them "for initiative in proposal, energy in action, and frankness in advice." I have always found these qualities in George Ball.
He has given generously of his extraordinary talents throughout his public career. He has proved his worth to his country day after day over long years of service. Now he is leaving us.
If we were to believe only what we read in the press, we would think that George Ball's chief service to this administration was to play the role of the devil's advocate.

Well, I don't know about that. In government, I have never known the Devil to need an advocate. He usually makes his own case pretty well.
But George Ball has been an advocate. He has been an able advocate of policies to guarantee the security of free men, and strengthen the cause of peace.
So tonight, George, at this swearing-out ceremony, we would like to present you with this token of our regard. Along with the signatures of some of your friends and admirers in this administration, it is inscribed, from all of us--"To a great advocate . . . from his advocates."
Note: The President spoke at an informal reception for former Secretary and Mrs. Ball, held in the Yellow Oval Room at the White House. As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.