Lyndon B. Johnson
October 21, 1968

Remarks to Reporters Upon Signing Bill Providing Funds for Eisenhower College
IN CASE you might be interested in what this is, this is a supplemental appropriation bill. I think that those of you who covered the White House at that time will remember one of the real fine breakthroughs in education nationally was the National Defense Education Act.
It was passed in 1958 during the Eisenhower administration. We have found that it is one of the basic acts of higher education. It provides assistance where people can pursue their college education. We have tried to add to it and build on it.
We have already signed 60 education bills. We have talked a lot about the matters that have come up.
Because of General Eisenhower's very deep interest in education, particularly poor boys and girls getting an opportunity to go to college, that act was passed.
This really is the 61st education measure. It provides $5 million for a college named in President Eisenhower's honor, the Eisenhower College.
I believe there is a condition that they raise local funds or they raise matching funds to go with that $5 million, so it really means $10 million for higher education.
Eisenhower College is located in the State of New York. General Schulz is here today to receive this pen. We will give him one to send to the Eisenhower College.

I am sending by General Schulz a letter to General Eisenhower. It says:
"It was with great pleasure that I signed today an appropriations measure granting funds for Eisenhower College.
"To all of us, your name symbolizes the highest in character, devotion to duty, and love of country. Surely no tribute to those qualities of yours could be more fitting than an institution of higher learning. This grant, and the college it will help to build, are a token of the love and admiration your countrymen feel for you.
"I'm proud to count myself your friend, and to be associated with this noble enterprise."
This is a pen for the General, and one for Mrs. Eisenhower.
Please tell General Eisenhower that we recall with great satisfaction the real pioneering education breakthrough, the National Defense Education Act. I know it will bring some pleasant memories to him.
Note: The President spoke at 1:06 p.m. in his office at the White House. During his remarks he referred to Gen. Robert L. Schulz, personal assistant to General Eisenhower.
As enacted, the bill (H.R. 20300) is Public Law 90-608 (82 Stat. 1190).
The National Defense Education Act (Public Law 85-864, 72 Stat. 1580) was approved on September 2, 1958 (see "Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958," Item 243).
As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.