Lyndon B. Johnson
October 12, 1967

Statement by the President on Taking "Escape Clause" Tariff Actions on Typewriter Ribbon Cloth, Stainless Steel Flatware, Sheet Glass, and Certain Carpets.
YESTERDAY evening I acted on four cases involving imports which have been subject to higher tariffs under the "escape clause" provisions of trade legislation. These tariffs were subject to expiration at midnight last night in the absence of Presidential action. In taking action on these cases, I considered the recommendations of the Tariff Commission, the Department of Commerce, the Department of Labor, the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, and the other affected Government departments and agencies.
In my view, it is in our self-interest to use our predominant position in world trade to promote the expansion of international trade. I wish to reaffirm the administration's basic support for a program to eliminate any unnecessary barriers to the freer flow of trade.
I therefore have permitted the "escape clause" tariff on typewriter ribbon cloth and stainless steel flatware to terminate.
However, I have asked the responsible Federal departments to maintain surveillance over these industries to determine if other assistance is appropriate at a later date.
I have signed proclamations extending the existing "escape clause" tariffs on sheet glass and Wilton and velvet carpets until January 1, 1970.
I have reluctantly concluded that a temporary extension of these cases is warranted. The evidence shows that a substantial increase in imports of these products would result in the absence of this action. This would cause severe job dislocation in the domestic industry. Many of the plants are located in regions of large unemployment with limited opportunities for reemployment in other industries. In the opinion of the Departments of Labor and Commerce, the adjustment assistance provisions of the Trade Expansion Act are at this time not an adequate remedy for these dislocations.
I am appointing a task force of representatives of the Departments of Commerce, Labor, the Small Business Administration, and other appropriate agencies to make a comprehensive study of the industries involved and of the small communities in which many of their plants are located. The mission of the task force will be to inventory the Government assistance programs available to these areas, to search for alternate employment, and to take other steps which will work out long term solutions to the problems created by job dislocation.
I believe that the task force can develop solutions which will enable the industries to make the necessary adjustments to the domestic and world market conditions within the time provided by the extension of this tariff.
The United States, like all trading nations, must be willing to buy the products of other countries if we expect them to buy ours. So we are keenly aware of the importance of expanding trade. At the same time, we--like other nations--maintain a fair and just concern for the well-being of those industries and their employees who suffer unusual hardship from imports.
I believe the disposition of these four cases--including the temporary relief of limited duration granted to two industries--is consistent with these trade objectives and in our Nation's best interests.
Note: On October 11, 1967, the President signed Proclamation 3815 "Extension of Increased Duty on Imports of Carpets and Rugs" and Proclamation 3816 "Extension of Remaining Increased Duties on Imports of Sheet Glass" (3 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 1433; 32 F.R. 14195, 14197; 3 CFR, 1967 Comp., pp. 89, 90).