Lyndon B. Johnson
October 22, 1965

Statement by the President Upon Signing Proclamation Relating to Imports of Lead and Zinc.
I HAVE TODAY issued a proclamation terminating the limits on imports of unmanufactured lead and zinc.
This action, which becomes effective immediately with respect to ores and concentrates and in 30 days for lead and zinc metals, is the result of extensive study and discussion within the executive branch. The Tariff Commission, in a unanimous decision, found that ending the quotas was not likely to have a detrimental effect on domestic producers. Additionally, the United States companies which require unmanufactured lead and zinc in their processing and manufacturing activities have made clear their great need for additional lead and zinc--in fact, many have indicated that without immediate relief they will be forced to suspend operations.
The lifting of these import controls at this time, rather than awaiting the automatic expiration in mid-October 1967, under the provisions of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, will prevent the loss of jobs in many sections of the Nation.
Domestic lead and zinc producers who do not object to greater imports at this time have expressed concern that future relief, if necessary, should not be inordinately delayed. Accordingly, I have urged the members of the Tariff Commission to streamline its procedures and to redouble its efforts to expedite proceedings in any case where it is indicated that delay might bar effective relief. I am confident improvements can be made.
The need for a strong and vigorous domestic lead and zinc mining industry in this country is obvious. Recently the Congress demonstrated its commitment to this goal by extending the Lead and Zinc Small Producers Stabilization Act--scheduled to expire at the end of this year--to December 31, 1969. I was pleased to sign this bill into law earlier this month thereby continuing the successful program of annual payments to qualified small lead and zinc mine operators.
Note: The President referred to Proclamation 3683 "Termination of Quantitative Limitations on Imports of Unmanufactured Lead and Zinc" (1 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 416; 30 F.R. 13623; 3 CFR, 1965 Supp., p. 69).
The bill extending the Lead-Zinc Small Producers Stabilization Act of October 3, 1961, was approved by the President on October 5, 1965 (Public Law 89-238, 79 Stat. 925).