Lyndon B. Johnson
October 01, 1968

Statement by the President Upon Signing Bill To Establish the Flaming Gorge National Recreation Area.
A HUNDRED YEARS AGO, an explorer named john Wesley Powell came up a magnificent canyon along the Green River, in what are now the States of Utah and Wyoming. Struck by its great beauty, Mr. Powell named the area Flaming Gorge.
The bill we sign today---establishing the Flaming Gorge National Recreation Area-will guarantee this generation and its descendants that these 201,000 acres of rich land and sparkling water will remain forever unspoiled.
In Flaming Gorge, a new dam has created a 42,000-acre lake, which offers boating, swimming, fishing, and other water sports.
A highway which snakes through the gorge is known as the "Drive Through the Ages" because millions of years of the earth's history are revealed in the visible rock formations.
A family can ride along quiet trails, or hike over untouched mountains, or camp beside beautiful streams.

Four years ago, 500,000 people visited Flaming Gorge. By 1966, that number had doubled. We estimate that by 1971, it will more than double again. But in this newly expanded area, there will be room for many, many more Americans to enjoy solitude and serenity.
This is the 10th national recreation area that I have helped establish as President. It is one more proof of our strong resolve that our great natural heritage will not be left to ruin. We will preserve the legacy of this land.
Several able and dedicated men worked hard for this bill, and they deserve America's thanks. Secretary Freeman, Assistant Secretary Baker, Senators Moss, McGee, and Jackson, Chairman Aspinall, Congressman Harrison.
They have served the cause of conservation-and that is the cause of every American.

Thank you.
Note: In his statement the President referred to Orville L. Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture, John A. Baker, Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Rural Development and Conservation, Senator Frank E. Moss of Utah, Senator Gale W. McGee of Wyoming, Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington, Chairman of the Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee, Representative Wayne N. Aspinall of Colorado, Chairman of the House Interior and Insular Affairs Committee, and Representative William Henry Harrison of Wyoming.
As enacted, the bill (S. 444) is Public Law 90540 (82 Stat. 904).