Lyndon B. Johnson
October 27, 1967

Memorandum in Response to Task Force Report "Reducing Federal Grant-in-Aid Processing Time"
Memorandum for Honorable Robert C. Weaver, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development; Honorable W. Willard Wirtz, Secretary of Labor; Honorable John W. Gardner, Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare; Honorable Sargent Shriver, Director, Office of Economic Opportunity
Last May, I asked you to form a Task Force to dig deeply into the problem of unnecessary red tape in the Federal Government. It was clear to me that many Federal Agencies were taking much too long to process applications filed by State and local governments.
I directed the Task Force to find ways to reduce by at least 50% the time it takes to process applications for Federal programs in four major areas of Inter-Governmental Cooperation--Model Cities, Neighborhood Centers, Manpower Development, and Water and Sewer Facilities.
I have now read your report and I am pleased with your response. The Joint Administrative Task Force which you established has met the goal.
As a result of your work, the Federal Government soon will be in a position to respond more quickly and effectively to local needs.
We are all now aware that one of the major problems confronting Governors and Mayors is the amount of red tape involved in getting grant-in-aid projects processed by Federal Agencies.
Existing procedures are often slow and cumbersome.
They are ill adapted to major new programs, such as Model Cities, which require participation of two or more Federal Agencies and include many individual programs.
Red tape means higher costs, wasted motion and frustration for our States and cities.
More important, delay can dash the hopes of many of our citizens in blighted ghettos and slums who need help--and need it now.
There is no way to make up for lost time to poor families without adequate housing, to the unemployed who need training to get a job, to those who need the social services which can be provided by a neighborhood center.
I commend the work of the Task Force in identifying ways and means to streamline procedures. It shows what can be accomplished when Agencies work together toward a common goal. I truly believe this effort is an important step forward in Inter-Agency cooperation.
I am pleased to note that your decisions will cut average processing time for 42 programs by 51 percent, with individual program improvements ranging from 24 to 72 percent. In one case, processing time would be cut from 376 to 139 working days, and in another case from 247 to 70 days.
I was also especially pleased to note that your recommendation called for
--Increased delegation of decision-making authority to the field.

--Elimination of unnecessary data requirements.

--Reduction in the number of technical reviews in Washington.

--Increased pre-application consultation among local, State and Federal officials.

--Improved methods of scheduling and controlling applications processing.
These recommendations have my full support and approval. But this is only a start.
All Federal Agencies must wage a relentless and continuing war against red tape.
First, each of you should institute steps now at all levels to carry through the processing improvements that you have approved. I want you to report to me, on or before December 31, 1967, that these new procedures, except in special circumstances, are fully operative.
Second, the Joint Administrative Task Force that we have established will continue for the purpose of effecting comparable administrative improvements in all critical remaining programs assigned to your Departments. A report on this work should be made to me on or before March 31, 1968.
Third, I am directing all Departments and Agencies with grant-in-aid programs involving State and local governments to undertake a comparable effort, applying the analytic techniques developed by the HUD-Labor-HEW-OEO group, and report back to me through the Director of the Bureau of the Budget not later than March 31, 1968.
I urge our State and local partners to join with us by simplifying their own laws, rules and procedures so as to cut processing time at all levels of government to an absolute minimum.
The needs of our people are urgent. I do not want a single unnecessary day of delay in delivering vital services under programs authorized and directed by the Congress.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The 19-page report is entitled "Reducing Federal Grant-in-Aid Processing Time--An Inter-Agency Report to the President." Members of the Joint Administrative Task Force follow: Dwight A. Ink of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Chairman; Donald F. Simpson of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Leo R. Wefts of the Department of Labor; Robert C. Cassidy of the Office of Economic Opportunity; and Guy W. Chamberlin, Jr., of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Staff Director.
Released October 31, 1967. Dated October 27, 1967.