Lyndon B. Johnson
October 13, 1965

Message to the Congress Transmitting Ninth Annual Report on the Trade Agreements Program.
To the Confess of the United States:
This is the ninth annual report on the Trade Agreements Program, as required by section 402(a) of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.
In 1964, U.S. and free-world trade continued to set fresh records.
--U.S. exports reached a new high of $25.6 billion, $6.9 billion more than our imports.
--U.S. farm exports rose to $6.4 billion, an all-time peak.

--Free-world exports reached a record $152 billion.
--The major trading nations agreed to take further steps under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to assist exports from developing countries.
The policy of two-way trade expansion and liberalization, initiated with the Trade Agreements Act of 1934 and continued by every Administration since that time, has brought great benefits to this country. In general, U.S. goods have enjoyed progressively easier access to foreign markets. Low cost, high-quality U.S. exports, sold and used in every corner of the world, have provided immediate evidence of the vitality of our free enterprise system. Our processors have gained ready access to essential raw materials, and have profited from the stimulus of keener competition. Consumers have enjoyed the wide range of choice which the world market provides.
But we have only begun. We must build on past success to achieve greater well-being for America, and for all the world's peoples. In particular, we must make every effort to assure the success of the current Geneva negotiations, known as the Kennedy Round.
In this International Cooperation Year of 1965, all nations should pledge themselves to work together for the steady expansion of commerce. Continuing its steady course begun in 1934, the United States will do its part in achieving that goal.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

October 13, 1965
Note: The "Ninth Annual Report of the President of the United States on the Trade Agreements Program for 1964," dated August 30, 1965 (141 pp., processed), was released with the President's message at the Naval Hospital, Bethesda, Md.