Lyndon B. Johnson
October 15, 1964

Remarks in Albee Square, Brooklyn.
Ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls:
I want to show you one of the reasons for Bob Kennedy's success and one of the reasons he is going to be the next Senator from New York.
Stand up, Ethel.
Senator Kennedy, Governor Harriman, Congressman Murphy, Congresswoman Kelly, Congressman Keogh, Congressman Multer, Congressman Carey, my old and longtime friend John Rooney, Abe Stark, Abe Beame, State Chairman McKeon, my fellow Americans:
I want to thank you for this, the largest crowd that I have seen in all my travels from Maine to California, and I want to thank you in advance for the greatest majority you are going to give us on November 3d of any area in the United States.
Mr. Rayburn said about our Congressmen from Texas one time--after they had most of the chairmanships in the House and a lot of the influence, and they asked, "How do you do it?" he said, "We pick them young, we pick them honest, we send them there, and we keep them there." That is what I want you to do with your Congressmen.
The United States needs a young, dynamic, compassionate, fighting liberal representing New York in the United States Senate--Bob Kennedy. His knowledge of housing, his knowledge of slum clearance, his knowledge in fighting crime, his knowledge in education, his knowledge in bringing peace to the world is what Brooklyn needs voting in the United States Senate.
[At this point someone in the crowd asked, "How about the Navy yard?"]
That's another reason you need him. He has already been down there talking about this Navy yard so much that I am going to have to get an earphone.
We have peace in the world and we must keep it. We need the unity of our people. We stand against communism. We stand for freedom. We must work in our streets and our slums, among our young people and among our poor people. There is work for us to do on all corners. It is untouched by our compassion.
Our society was built on respect for law and order and we mean to maintain it. This is a challenge to all of us to look for real leaders. You have real leaders in the House of Representatives. Now send us a real leader for the United States Senate.
I want to tell you this has been a long and exciting day. November 3d we are going to have a great Democratic victory if all of you will go to work, put your shoulder to the wheel, and do what is best for your country. If you do that, I promise you we will do what is best for you.
Thank you and goodby.
Note: The President spoke at 7 p.m. at Albee Square in Brooklyn, N.Y. In his opening remarks he referred to Robert F. Kennedy, Democratic candidate for U.S. Senator from New York, and Mrs. Kennedy, W. Avercll Harriman, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs and former Governor of New York, Representatives John M. Murphy, Edna F. Kelly, Eugene J. Keogh, Abraham J. Multer, Hugh L. Carcy, and John J. Rooney, all of New York, Abe Stark, Borough President of Brooklyn, Abraham D. Beame, Comptroller of New York City, and William H. McKeon, chairman of the New York State Democratic Committee.