Lyndon B. Johnson
September 12, 1964

Statement by the President Following Inspection of Hurricane Damage in Florida and Georgia.
ON THE WAY back to Washington last night following our hurricane inspection trip to Florida and Georgia, I had an opportunity to review the damage as I saw it with the Senators of both States and with the Federal officials whose departments can and will contribute to rehabilitation from the storm.
While final damage surveys have not been completed, it is apparent the total damage, public and private, will approximate the $200 million figure estimated by Mr. McDermott, making this one of the most severe storms to hit this area in this century.
I have pledged all possible Federal assistance to the people of Florida and Georgia and we are fulfilling that promise. I have directed Mr. McDermott, head of the Office of Emergency Planning, to augment his staff in both States to insure all possible assistance to State and local authorities. The OEP will coordinate all Federal aid under the Disaster Assistance Act, on my behalf. I have also asked that I be furnished with regular reports of the status of survey efforts in both States.
In addition I have:
--ordered the Corps of Engineers to provide all assistance required to complete damage surveys so that an allocation of Federal assistance funds can be made,
--asked the Small Business Administration to provide adequate staff in the disaster area to expeditiously process applications for loan assistance from eligible property owners,
--directed the U.S. Public Health Service to assist local communities as required to protect the health of citizens in the areas which suffered severe hurricane damage and where water and other utility systems are damaged,
--instructed the Department of Agriculture to continue to provide such surplus foods as are required to evacuated families and to complete its survey of damage to crops and farm properties.
The Bureau of Public Roads is cooperating with State and county highway authorities in a survey of road and bridge damage and has been instructed to proceed immediately with eligible highway system repair.
The Red Cross, which has provided such outstanding help to the people of these States in their time of need, will continue its personnel and services in the affected area.
As soon as accurate damage data has been assembled Mr. McDermott will request a specific allocation of funds from the President's disaster fund. I am prepared to make that allocation promptly and funds for that purpose are available.
I am confident full recovery from the effects of Hurricane Dora will be accomplished, with close cooperation between Federal, State, and local authorities. I was impressed yesterday with the debris clearance and other recovery activities already in progress. I was impressed too with the outstanding leadership demonstrated in this emergency by Governor Bryant and Governor Sanders and I expect to keep in close touch with both of them as recovery work proceeds.