Lyndon B. Johnson
September 06, 1968

Message to the Congress Transmitting Annual Report of the Surgeon General on the Health Research Facilities Construction Program
To the Congress of the United States:
I am pleased to transmit the 12th Annual Report of the Surgeon General on the Health Research Facilities Construction Program for FY 1967.
The effectiveness of current medical practice rests largely upon discoveries of medical research--an activity which must continue to grow if we are to bring better health and a fuller life to all Americans. Since 1956, the Federal Government--through the Health Research Facilities Program--has played an important role in providing funds for constructing and equipping health research facilities. During that period, the Health Research Facilities Construction Program has provided over $400 million in matching grants to about 400 universities, hospitals, and research institutions in all 50 States of the Nation.
This program has been a vital part of our efforts to increase man's understanding of disease and human development. It complements the Federal Government's continuing support of health research, which has grown from $1 billion in 1963 to nearly $1.5 billion today, 65 percent of the Nation's total expenditures for biomedical research.
This program has also been an important part of our overall effort to assure that the benefits of modern medicine are available to all of our people. To reach this goal, we have in just the last four years enacted over 30 new health measures and increased the Federal health investment from $6 billion to nearly $ 14 billion annually.
It is accordingly with pleasure that I submit to the Congress the 12th Annual Report of the Surgeon General on the Health Research Facilities Construction Program.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON

The White House

September 6, 1968
Note: The "Twelfth Annual Report on Health Research Facilities by the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service" is printed in House Document 381 (90th Cong., 2d sess.).