Lyndon B. Johnson
September 28, 1967

Remarks Upon Presenting the Medal of Honor to Sgt. David C. Dolby, USA.
Secretary Resor, General Haines, Members of the Congress, distinguished guests, the Dolby family, Sergeant Dolby:
We have come here this morning to honor one of America's bravest men. In presenting Sergeant David Dolby with the Nation's highest award, we bear witness to a courage and a dedication that rests well above and far beyond the call of duty.
To this soldier, valor is a familiar companion. He is a member of the 1st Cavalry, the remarkable division to which I had the honor of presenting a Presidential Unit Citation earlier this month.
He already holds several medals, including a Purple Heart and a Silver Star.
And yet he just recently turned 21 years of age.
We are proud that such men still march under the American colors.
But for all of our pride in Sergeant Dolby, this is a day for sorrow as well--sorrow that in a world that boasts of its progress and its civilization, heroism and sacrifice on the battlefields still seem to be necessary.
We who have labored all of our lives to preserve and enrich human life in our own country and abroad grieve that young Americans must go out to the frontier of freedom and fight, taking the lives of others while risking their own.
I am often asked, "Why do you say so little in reply to the critics of the war?" The answer is simple. No one hates war and killing more than I do. No sane American can greet the news from Vietnam with enthusiasm.
Indeed, an American who rejoiced in war and conflict should be instantly removed from any position of responsibility.
But in the same sense, we cannot cheer. as we learn of the impact of our might on the enemy.
In the spirit of Abraham Lincoln, we must confront our obligations with dedication and with resolution. We must be moved by anguish and compassion at the consequences.
We recognize and have always recognized that there can be no simple military solution to the problems of Southeast Asia. But we have also had to face the hard reality that only military power can bar aggression and can make a political solution possible.
We wish for nothing more than a swift and honorable resolution of our differences in Vietnam.
We have offered to talk any time, anywhere. But until there is a response that might lead to a just political settlement, we must and we will fight to prevent others from imposing their military solution on the people of South Vietnam and Southeast Asia.
Until the day comes when we lay down our arms and deal in good faith with North Vietnam across a conference table, brave young men like David Dolby will have to fight in order to assure others their freedom.
They are the finest of America's manhood. As Winston Churchill wrote, "Courage is rightly esteemed the first of human qualities because it is the quality which guarantees all others."
We cherish that quality in you, Sergeant Dolby, and we shall redeem that guarantee.
We are so proud that your parents and your family can be here with you today. We know that they, too, are so proud of you.
[Secretary of the Army Stanley R. Resor read the citation, the text of which follows.]
The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, March 3, 1863, has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor, to
SERGEANT (THEN SP 4) DAVID C. DOLBY, UNITED STATES ARMY
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty:
On 21 May 1966, Specialist Dolby was serving as a machine gunner of Company B, 1st Battalion (Airborne), 8th Cavalry in the Republic of Vietnam, when his platoon, while advancing tactically, suddenly came under intense fire from the enemy located on a ridge immediately to the front. Six members of the platoon were killed instantly and a number were wounded, including the platoon leader. Specialist Dolby's every move brought fire from the enemy. However, aware that the platoon leader was critically wounded, and that the platoon was in a precarious situation, Specialist Dolby moved the wounded men to safety and deployed the remainder of the platoon to engage the enemy. Subsequently, his dying platoon leader ordered Specialist Dolby to withdraw the forward elements to rejoin the platoon. Despite the continuing intense enemy fire and with utter disregard for his own safety, Specialist Dolby positioned able-bodied men to cover the withdrawal of the forward elements, assisted the wounded to the new position, and he, alone, attacked enemy positions until his ammunition was expended. Replenishing his ammunition, he returned to the area of most intense action, single-handedly killed three enemy machine gunners and neutralized the enemy fire, thus enabling friendly elements on the flank to advance on the enemy redoubt. He defied the enemy fire to personally carry a seriously wounded soldier to safety, where he could be treated and, returning to the forward area, he crawled through withering fire to within fifty meters of the enemy bunkers and threw smoke grenades to mark them for air strikes. Although repeatedly under fire at close range from enemy snipers and automatic weapons, Specialist Dolby directed artillery fire on the enemy and succeeded in silencing several enemy weapons. He remained in his exposed location until his comrades had displaced to more secure positions. His actions of unsurpassed valor during four hours of intense combat were a source of inspiration to his entire company, contributed significantly to the success of the overall assault on the enemy position, and were directly responsible for saving the lives of a number of his fellow soldiers. Specialist Dolby's heroism was in the highest tradition of the United States Army.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: The President spoke at 11:38 a.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Secretary of the Army Stanley R. Resor, Gen. Ralph E. Haines, Jr., Vice Chief of Staff of the Army, and to Sergeant Dolby, his parents Mr. and Mrs. Charles L. Dolby, and his brother Daniel, of Oaks, Pa.