Lyndon B. Johnson
September 22, 1967

Statement by the President Upon Announcing Appointments to the National Advisory Council Authorized by the Education Professions Development Act of 1967.
THIS ACT, one of the significant achievements of the administration and the 90th Congress, will greatly contribute to the Nation's ability to solve one of the key problems of education: the development and enlistment of better equipped teachers for our schools and colleges. Teachers are central to the role of education in our country. And education is the very base of an informed and strong Nation.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House release announcing appointments to the National Advisory Council on Education Professions Development. The release stated that the Council would review the operation of Federal programs designed to improve the quality of education and to meet critical shortages of adequately trained teachers, and that it would advise the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare and the Commissioner of Education on all matters relating to this area.
The release added that the Council would be chaired by Dr. Lawrence D. Haskew, vice chancellor of the University of Texas System. Other members listed in the announcement follow: Sister Mary Corita, I.H.M., professor of art, Immaculate Heart College, Los Angeles, Calif.; E. Leonard Jossem, professor and chairman of physics, Ohio State University; Marjorie Lerner, principal, Donoghue Elementary School, Chicago, Ill.; Mary Rieke, president, Oregon School Boards Association; Carl Marburger, commissioner of education, State of New Jersey; Lloyd Morrisett, vice president, the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, New York; Theodore Sizer, dean of the faculty of education, Harvard University; Adron Doran, president, Morehead State College, Morehead, Ky.; Bernard Watson, associate superintendent of schools, Philadelphia, Pa.; Don Davies, executive secretary, National Commission on Teacher Education and Professional Standards, National Education Association; Annette Engel, teacher-counselor, Roosevelt Elementary School District, Phoenix, Ariz.; Edward Moreno, foreign language consultant K-12, Ventura County Schools, Calif.; Kathryn Lumley, director of reading clinics for the District of Columbia schools; Susan W. Gray, director, Demonstration and Research Center for Early Education, George Peabody College, Nashville, Tenn.
For the President's statement upon signing the Education Professions Development Act of 1967, see Item 192.