Lyndon B. Johnson
September 27, 1967

Remarks to the Press by the President and Foreign Secretary George Brown of the United Kingdom Following Their Meeting.
THE PRESIDENT. George asked us if the Foreign Secretary would see you before he left. I asked him if he would meet with you and he agreed to do so.
He came here at my invitation as he always does when he comes to our country. We are very good friends and very strong allies.
I followed his speech yesterday with a great deal of interest at the United Nations.
This morning we met for a little more than an hour, taking a trip around the world, discussing our mutual interests of various kinds. I don't think I will go into the details of those discussions other than to say that we had a thorough and fruitful exchange of our respective viewpoints.
If the Foreign Secretary has anything he would like to say
MR. Brown-. There is nothing I can add to that--that is exactly what has happened-except to say this: This is a particularly important moment for one of us in the Government to have an opportunity to exchange views with the President, because quite a number of these problems which have been with us for some time have obviously taken on additional complexities. I am thinking very much of the Middle East, among other things.
The British Government will be very glad to know the President's thinking and I have been able to acquaint him of our thinking. And having been to the United Nations this week and having been involved in what is going on there, again, that added to the importance of being able to talk to the President about it.
Beyond that I don't think I want to say anything except it is always very pleasant to see him.
THE PRESIDENT. You are returning home this evening.
MR. BROWN. I must be home this evening because the party conference starts at the weekend and we have the executive and all the operations preceding it going on from tomorrow in London. So I must get back there tonight. It is not a journey I look forward to, going overnight from here back home. The time scale runs against you.
Reporter: Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 11:12 a.m. in his office at the White House. In his remarks he referred to George E. Christian, Special Assistant to the President.
As printed above, this item follows the text released by the White House Press Office.