Lyndon B. Johnson
September 28, 1964

Remarks at the Airport, Burlington, Vermont.
Governor and Mrs. Hoff, Senator Fayette, Senator O'Shea, Mayor Daley, Mr. O'Brien, Mrs. Schurman, Mr. Ryan, my fellow Americans:
This is my second annual visit to Vermont. I came here last year and, if you extend my welcome, I would like to make it a habit.
We want to thank you, genuinely thank you, for being so patient and understanding about our problems today. This is a wonderful sight to behold from this platform-to see so many friendly, smiling, happy faces from the fire truck over here all the way around. It gives us great joy to know that you would want to come here and say hello to my party.
This is the third appearance I have made since I left Washington, and every place we have been, we have been met with courtesy and hospitality and enthusiasm. We are very sorry we are late, but we are so happy we finally got here. You know, you can't really object if you are late because you are seeing people. What would really disappoint us would be if we had gotten here ahead of time because there would have been nobody to meet us.
Ten months ago, because of a terrible tragedy, we lost a man we all loved so much as a leader and as a friend, the President of our country. In a matter of moments, I became your President and had to try to pick up where he left off. Since that time we have had the Congress in session and we have been considering the program that President Kennedy had recommended.
We analyzed that program very carefully when we went in, and there were 51 major measures before the Congress that needed attention, and we would hope would be considered. This morning, about 6:45, I talked to Senator Mansfield, the great leader of the Senate, and he reminded me then that all of those 51 measures had passed the Senate as of now.
I want to be fair. Some of them are in conference and will have to be adjusted between the two Houses. Some of them won't be passed by the House of Representatives, I am sure. But I do want to say that we have much to be thankful for, and much to be grateful for.
We want to say to you good people of Vermont that we appreciate the support you have given us, we appreciate the prayers you have said for us, we appreciate the way you have tried to hold up our hand and help us do the very best job that we could do.
Sitting in Washington, surrounded by papers and officials, you sometimes begin to lose track of the real source of the strength of the United States, the real strength of America. That is why it is inspiring for us to come to this State, whose hills and valleys have contributed so much to the leadership of America.
Some of that leadership has come from the ranks of my party. Phil Hoff, your great Governor, has not only given you good government; he has made a national reputation as an outstanding servant of the people, and he is respected throughout the land. I know of no young Governor in any of the 50 States that I have more confidence in, or that I am more anxious to work with.
And when I was here in October, I got to know Fred Fayette. He is proof that you still have more outstanding young men here in Vermont on the way up. I hope that come next January, after we get through with the inauguration, that all of you folks can go from the Capitol Grounds where we begin the parade, up to the Senate Office Building, and see your new Democratic United States Senator, Fred Fayette.
But in Vermont, as in the Nation, leadership dedicated to progress is not confined just to one party. All the patriotism in this country is not in the Democratic Party or in the Republican Party. No party has a monopoly on good judgment, on good service, or on patriotism.
Some of our most distinguished Americans, as well as some of my warmest friends, are Vermont Republicans. There is George Aiken, who has been one of the architects of the bipartisan foreign policy of this country, which has protected freedom through the administrations of four different Presidents.
And it was only last week that I went to see the Prime Minister of Canada. I flew across the Nation. We went there to meet in connection with the treaty between our country and Canada in order to better relations. Senator Aiken was on that trip. He represented not only the Republican Party, but represented all Americans, because he is known as the guiding genius of our relations between Canada and the United States.
Of course, there is the shining memory of Warren Austin, another Republican, who did as much as any man in this century to lead America toward responsible partnership in world affairs.
These men were never divided by narrow partisanship. They were never divided by sectional pride. They asked themselves this question: "What is good for my country? What is good for America?" And they believed that what was good for America was good for them and good for their party.
They drew their strength not from your granite hills, but from Vermont's historic traditions. This is a State which has looked to the future always, which has acted courageously and wisely to meet the challenge of the future:
Vermont's Green Mountain boys, with a little help from New Hampshire and Massachusetts, won the first offensive victory of the Revolution.
Vermont drafted the first State constitution to forbid slavery.
Vermont was the first State admitted to the Union after the original thirteen.
Vermont was the first State to make constitutional provision for a complete State system of education.
Vermont was the first State to set aside land for schools in each township.
Vermonters went West to help build many of the States of the Northeast and the Mississippi Valley.
Half of the able-bodied men of Vermont went to fight in the Civil War.
And in our own time, Vermonters have displayed the same vision and the same leadership on the world scene. From the United Nations to the test ban treaty, Vermonters have been in the forefront for peace and for freedom.
Well, I believe deeply in the Democratic Party. But throughout my career I have worked closely and gained inspiration from Republican colleagues like many of those that you have sent to Washington. I have never put my party ahead of my country; and I never shall.
We had shared a common belief in the future of America and the principles of progress. We believe that this country had a duty to act responsibly and courageously.
And this is not the case this year.
This year our proud tradition of responsible partisanship is endangered. This year the progress won in three decades of patient striving--by Democrats and Republicans alike--is in danger.
At home we have pursued policies that have improved the well-being of all of our people. At home, today, these policies are in danger, and you ought to know they are in danger, and you ought to do something about it. I think you are going to, come next November.
Around the world we have followed the course of using our power with restraint, of helping others achieve freedom and self-government, of learning to live with people who share this planet with us. Well, I tell you today that that course is in danger.
One of our great parties has been captured, captured by a faction of men who stand outside the whole range of common agreement and common principles which have brought us to the summit of success. These men have not just marched out of step with American progress--they have refused and they now refuse to march at all. If they gain control of our Government, they would not change the direction of our march; they would just halt it altogether.
They have already said that their aim is not to pass laws, but to repeal them.
Which laws do they mean?
Do they mean the REA that has brought electricity to all the farm homes of America? Well, they will never repeal that, will they?
They oppose the Minimum Wage Act which gives protection to underpaid Americans, and which has increased the prosperity of all Americans by boosting purchasing power. And I don't believe they are going to repeal the minimum wage, do you?
They oppose legislation to help improve our colleges and our universities. And I don't believe they are going to repeal that law, do you?
They opposed the atomic test ban treaty which ended the radioactive poisoning of our atmosphere, and which was supported by Republicans from Vermont. But I don't believe you want to repeal that treaty either, do you?
They opposed the tax cut which means higher incomes and more jobs and expanding business for all of our people, and which will increase income in Vermont by $54 million. Do you want that bill repealed?
Well, most Americans, I think, as I recall back in 1935, when the bill was passed, there were just a handful of votes against it; most Americans, I believe, feel that we should have a social security system which helps old people live in dignity and security. Well, when social security was proposed back there in 1935, I believe, 30 years ago, some of these people called it a "cruel hoax." But most Americans didn't think so, and it was passed. I don't believe they want it voluntary and I don't believe they want it repealed, do you?
When the war on poverty was proposed in January, this faction said it was an attempt to buy votes. But most Americans didn't think so, and they passed the bill in the Senate with the support of some of our friends from Vermont. They passed it in the House. It is now the law of the land and we are going to do something about making taxpayers out of taxeaters. We are going to conduct a war on poverty and try to help the poor find jobs.
Most Americans believe in providing every boy and girl with an education that they can use. Some of this faction has said, "The child has no right to an education."
In the past 4 years dozens of programs and pledges of the 1960 Republican platform have come before the Congress. They have received support from Democrats and Republicans alike. But this faction has opposed most of them.
The philosophy that would tear down these programs, in my judgment, does not represent the people of Vermont and does not even represent the Republican Party of Vermont. They do not represent the Republican Party of America. They do not represent the view of responsible, forward-looking men of any party anywhere.
And they do not look forward to the kind of America which this State for almost two centuries has worked, and fought, and voted to build.
And it is not the kind of America that you are going to vote for, I don't think, next November.
My own party does not believe in partisanship for the sake of partisanship. When I became leader of the Senate, I said I reject the philosophy that it is the duty of the opposition to oppose. I said I think it is my duty as a Democrat to support a Republican President, President Eisenhower, when he is right, and to oppose him when he is wrong. I am here to say to you I kept that pledge and I supported him more and supported the Republican President and the Republican Party and the Republican program more when I was Democrat leader than my opponent in this race supported him then. And he was a Republican!
I intend for the Johnson administration to take account of that principle and to bring into Government men and women of both parties who are pledged to continue the progress of the past 30 years.
When Franklin Roosevelt became President, he selected three Republicans to be in his Cabinet.
When Harry Truman was President, he appointed men like Robert Lovett and John McCloy to high positions.
When John Kennedy became President in 1961, he brought to Washington outstanding Republicans like Henry Cabot Lodge, Robert McNamara, Douglas Dillon, John McCone, Chris Herter, and others.
I believe this is good sense, and I am going to do the same.
I do not believe that the faction that temporarily leads the Republican Party represents all the people. I know it doesn't represent all the Republicans. So, my fellow Americans, let us work together, men of every region, of every religion, of every race, of every party. Let us labor to pass on to our children an America more united, an America more prosperous, an America more progressive, an America more peaceful than ever before in our history.
Let us be faithful to our traditions of the past so that future generations will say of us, as we say of our forefathers, "They guarded and handed on the American dream."
It has been wonderful to be here with you this afternoon. I apologize again for being late. I just want to leave this thought with you: In this country, the people are the bosses. You determine by your vote who you want to lead this Nation. Ten months ago, because of provisions of the Constitution, the Vice President succeeded to the Presidency. I have done, with the ability that I have and such talents as I possess, my dead-level best to lead this country and to do what is right by all of its people.
I have not tried to be a President that believed in a labor government, or a business government, or a farm government, or an extreme government of any kind. I have tried to be a President of all the people. I have made mistakes like other men. I tried to make as few as I could. I have always thought I was doing right. I have done the best I knew how.
You people have given me strength. When I felt depressed, you have inspired me. I have come here today, prior to the time you make a decision. In November you will be called upon to exercise the highest responsibility of an American citizen. You live in the greatest Nation in the world, and how great it is in the future is going to depend upon the wisdom of your decision. In November when you go to that ballot box, you are going to do what you think is best for your country, and that is what I want you to do.
If I were acting for you, I would vote for Congressman O'Shea, and I would vote for Senator Fayette, and I would vote for Phil Hoff, and I won't get personal, but I will tell you somebody else I would vote for!
I am not here to give you a hard sell today. You have the right and you have the privilege, and you have the duty, to make a change and to bring a new government if you think your safety and your security and the future of your children will be best served by that change. If you do, we will have no hard feelings. Actually, I will have more time really to visit Vermont.
But if you decide in your wisdom that you want us to continue, you want us to carry on, we will go back there in January and we will try to pull together the people of this country.
We won't have a government of the north or the south or the east or the west. We will have a government of all sections, of all people, of all regions, of all religions, of all races. We will try to unite instead of divide. We will try to love instead of to hate. We will try to get along in the world instead of abuse our neighbors. We will try to go anywhere, see anyone, do anything that we can do with honor to bring peace to all the people of this world.
We are a very small minority. We have only 190 million people in a world of over 3 billion. There is ferment, there is unrest, there is division, there is dissension. There are many problems to be solved. I don't know that I am the one to solve them. That is a matter for you to decide.
But I do want you to know this: I don't know how many Presidents are as lucky and as fortunate as I am to get a chance to come here in the autumn season to the lovely little State of Vermont and look you in the face and tell you that I want your help, I want your hand, I want your prayers. And if you give them to me, I will just do the best I can.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at a rally at the airport in Burlington, Vt. His opening words referred to Governor and Mrs. Philip H. Hoff, State Senator Frederick J. Fayette, Democratic candidate for U.S. Senator, State Senator Bernard O'Shea, Democratic candidate for U.S. Representative, Daniel J. O'Brien, State Democratic Chairman, Mrs. Beatrice Schurman, National Committeewoman, William J. Ryan, National Committeeman, all of Vermont, and Mayor John J. Daley of Rutland.
The text of the remarks of Mrs. Johnson, who spoke briefly, was also released.