Lyndon B. Johnson
September 27, 1966

Remarks During a Visit to Cape Kennedy With Chancellor Erhard of Germany.
Chancellor Erhard, Dr. Webb, distinguished officials of the Republic of West Germany, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to thank you for taking time this afternoon away from what I know is always a very tight schedule to welcome our distinguished friends.
I am pleased that our distinguished visitor, Chancellor Erhard, could also find time on his busy schedule to let me show him what you are doing here at Cape Kennedy. I wanted him to see it, not merely because of the pride we take in what you are achieving here, but also because of the promise which this great spaceport holds for the future of all mankind.
The story of man's advancement, throughout history, has been the story of his victories over the forces of nature. In that continuing story, our own generation has been given the opportunity to write the grandest chapter of them all. Much of that chapter has already been written in this place where we now meet this afternoon.
As we look at this vast scientific complex, it is hard to believe, Mr. Chancellor, that only 5 years ago, no American had yet orbited the earth. Today, 17 American astronauts have flown in orbit. Five of them have flown twice.
Only 5 years ago, the heaviest satellite that we could put in orbit, as you saw a few moments ago, weighed only some 3,000 pounds. The Saturn V, which will make its first flight next year, can place 250,000 pounds into earth orbit, as you have just been told.
Five years ago, the moon was far beyond our reach. Today, we have thousands of detailed photographs of our planet's orbiting satellite.
I could go on, Mr. Chancellor, listing the achievements of the remarkable national space team and the new adventures which lie just ahead. I can also tell you that we are on our schedule in our plan and our determination to put men on the moon before 1970.
But there is more--much more--involved in our work than the adventure and the challenge of space.
The adventures of men like Conrad and Gordon, whom you met this afternoon and who came here with us, not only widen their own horizons, but they open up vast new possibilities for our men of science throughout the world.
That is really why I invited you, Mr. Chancellor, to come along with me to have a personal look at these fantastic craft that are taking us into the future and to which men of German ancestry have contributed so much and of whom we are so proud. That is why I am discussing with the Chancellor, as well as other leaders, my hope that our scientists can join in joint endeavors to reap the full benefits of this adventure.
Later in the day, we will make an announcement about expected exchanges among the excellent young people of both nations which I think will be of interest to the German people and to the American people.1
1See Item 486, p. 1080.
In particular, I have authorized Mr. Jim Webb to discuss whether solar physicists from Europe may wish to be associated with the American solar physicists who are preparing telescopes to fly on an Apollo flight in order to study the sun at the height of the solar cycle.
This is an avenue of international cooperation which we intend to vigorously pursue, in every way that we can.
It has been said that the real and legitimate goal of science is the endowment of human life with new inventions and riches. That is the real goal of our own space effort in America. You are helping to endow all of human life, in all lands, with new inventions and with new riches.
And to each employee here who has contributed his part, I, as your President, say thank you. We appreciate you and we admire you. The presence of our distinguished visitor serves to remind us of the very special nature of achievements in space. Their benefits must flow, not just to a single nation, but they must flow to all nations and to all peoples everywhere.
Let me give you briefly a few examples. Our weather satellites have already started a revolution in weather forecasting--which already has been a boon to farmers and fishermen the world over.
Other satellites are improving navigation, bringing information and education to literally hundreds of millions by relaying radio and television programs across the continents and across the seas of the world.
At the same time that we are meeting the demands for long space flights by our astronauts, we are developing techniques that will help us solve the problems of air and water pollution here on earth. We are very proud of the studies that we have made of your country and the information that you have given us in this field, Mr. Chancellor.
We have launched six research satellites that are designed by scientists in other countries. Eight more are planned.
We are working with scientists in 14 other countries in the launching of sounding rockets.
We are cooperating with 17 other nations which provide tracking, data acquisition, and command services for our satellites.
We would like so much to see many more multilateral projects organized and managed by the countries of Europe, acting together. I would like to say, this afternoon, that the United States is prepared, if requested, to join with them in space efforts of mutual benefit by providing launch vehicles, or in whatever other ways you leaders may feel that we can be of help.
This cooperation is among acknowledged friends. But we go beyond that. We seek--and we shall continue to seek--cooperation in space with the Soviet Union. We have an agreement to exchange certain kinds of space data. We have shared information on variations in the earth's magnetic field. We will soon publish jointly American and Soviet material on space biology and medicine.
We have agreed to certain principles governing the use of space.
But these agreements in principle--expressed in resolutions at the United Nations-fall short of the full, binding force of treaty law.

I earnestly hope that the Soviet Union-- whose space achievements have been very great--will feel as we feel in America: that the rapid evolution of space technology makes early conclusion of a treaty between us governing the use of space a most urgent matter.
So it is a matter of the highest common interest, for the future peace of the world and the security of all men may very well be at stake as a result of our efforts.
And so, as we explore the vastness of space, and as we dream of new horizons, we work, too, for the manmade controls that will keep these efforts at the service of man and at the service of peace.
There is so much ahead of us for all of us to do.
Each nation has its own problems--food for its hungry, medicine for its sick, care for its elderly, education for its young.
Each nation has its own dreams and we have exchanged dreams in these last 2 pleasant days that I have spent with the Chancellor. We have dreams of peace, of security, of independence, of progress, of the advancement of our youth and friendship among all the peoples of the world.
And together, men of all nations face the challenge not just of our world, but of the vast universe whose stars shine down on us all, and whose mysteries we slowly will penetrate together.
So let us go about the business of mankind.

Let us abandon the use of force.
And let us meet together--in peace--the common challenges that confront all men. The time we have is short. The earth moves on. And the heavens wait.
Before we leave, I want each man and woman who is in any way associated with this endeavor to know how much your country appreciates your effort and your achievement.
As we meet here our men patrol and guard freedom throughout the world. Some of our men are dying at this very hour in the rice paddies of Vietnam. We honor, respect, and are grateful for their contribution to our freedom.
I particularly want to acknowledge the great efforts that Dr. Debus, who came to us from Germany, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, who has been so intimately identified with our space program, also a former citizen of Germany, have made to our space effort.
I am called upon, on occasions, to distribute Medals of Honor to our gallant men who have protected our security and who have advanced the cause of peace. Today I don't have any Medals of Honor to distribute, but I would like, in thanking each of you, to point out that I know of none who are more deserving of our recognition than Dr. Debus and Dr. von Braun.
I want to add to that list two great American public servants, too--Secretary Robert McNamara, who is associated in this effort and who is one of our most brilliant and competent leaders today, and our own most able, imaginative Director, Dr. James Webb.
I have said many times I would like to have Dr. Webb in the Cabinet and I would have if he didn't have a more important assignment.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 5:05 p.m. at the Vehicle Assembly Building at Cape Kennedy, Fla. In his opening words he referred to Chancellor Ludwig Erhard of the Republic of West Germany and Dr. James E. Webb, Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Later he referred to Comdr. Charles Conrad, Jr., and Lt. Comdr. Richard F. Gordon, Jr., U.S. Astronauts, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, John F. Kennedy Space Center, Cape Kennedy, Fla., and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
On November 28, 1966, the White House announced that an agreement for the first foreign space station on United States territory had been reached that day in Paris by an exchange of notes between U.S. Ambassador to France Charles E. Bohlen and the European Space Research Organization (ESRO), composed of 10 West European countries. The release stated that an ESRO station, to be operated in cooperation with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, would be established near Fairbanks, Alaska, for the purpose of receiving telemetry from and sending commands to ESRO scientific satellites. According to the release, the station would be operational by the summer of 1967.
In making the announcement the White House quoted the paragraph in the President's remarks at Cape Kennedy on September 27 in which he expressed hope that many more multilateral projects would be organized and managed by the countries of Europe acting together (2 Weekly Comp. Pres. Docs., p. 1740).