Lyndon B. Johnson
September 11, 1965

Proclamation 3671—National Employ the Physically Handicapped Week, 1965

During the twenty years since World War II, this Nation has made giant strides in extending full opportunities to her handicapped citizens. In greater numbers than ever, the handicapped today are finding their rightful places in business and industry across the land.
Record numbers of the handicapped are being rehabilitated under Federal-State programs; placements of the handicapped by public employment offices are at high levels; and the Federal Government has been employing the handicapped in greater numbers than before.
All this is gratifying. America's fine record of acceptance of the handicapped is one of the highlights of our time.
Yet, we cannot be complacent. Although much progress has been made, the victory has not yet been won. There remains much for us to do.
Many handicapped men and women, particularly those with more severe physical and mental disabilities, still remain outside the mainstream of American life. The doors to employment remain closed to them not because of their inability to work but because society has not fully recognized their abilities.
America has not yet completely learned that the handicapped can have as much ability as the able-bodied, and sometimes even more.
Working together, we can open new doors of opportunity for the handicapped. We can broaden their vistas and raise their hopes. In so doing, we can strengthen our Nation, for our strength rests in the participation of all our citizens and not just some of our citizens.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, in consonance with the Joint Resolution of Congress approved August 11, 1945 (59 Stat. 530), designating the first week of October of each year as National Employ the Physically Handicapped Week, do hereby call upon the people of our Nation to observe the week beginning October 3, 1965, for such purpose.
During that week I urge all the Governors of States, mayors of cities, and other public officials, as well as leaders of industry, educational and religious groups, labor, civic, veterans', agricultural, women's, scientific, professional, and fraternal organizations, and all other interested organizations and individuals, including the handicapped themselves, to participate in this observance.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this eleventh day of September in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-five, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninetieth.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON
By the President:
DEAN RUSK

Secretary of State