Lyndon B. Johnson
September 07, 1965

Statement by the President on Announcing Progress in the Development of the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site.
HERBERT CLARK HOOVER was not only a dedicated President, but he was a truly great humanitarian. He placed service to his country, and to the cause of humanity throughout the world, above all else. His outstanding contributions to the operations of our Government and the wise and generous counsel he gave to leaders of both national parties who followed him in office exemplify the highest traditions of public service. They make his birthplace a deeply significant part of our Nation's history, a part that will now be preserved and made accessible to all Americans.
Note: The President's statement was made public as part of a White House release reporting that rapid progress was being made in converting former President Herbert Hoover's birthplace at West Branch, Iowa, into a national shrine.
The release continued as follows:
"President Johnson signed the act establishing the area as a national historical site on August 12. He requested the Department of the Interior to move quickly to implement the legislation.
"Since then, plans have been drawn for a visitor center and parking area, as well as the rerouting of city traffic from in front of the cottage where the 31st U.S. President was born. In addition, provision is being made for restoring some of the older buildings near the cottage to preserve the atmosphere of the site.
"The Department of the Interior's National Park Service will arrange as soon as possible for transfer to the Service of some 200 acres now being administered by the General Services Administration. This will include the cottage, a number of other buildings, and the graves of the former Republican President and his wife, Lou Henry Hoover. GSA will continue to administer the modern Herbert Hoover Library.
"When the transfer has been completed, physical preparation of the site can begin immediately. Selection of supervisory staff is now underway, and the interim appointment of an acting superintendent for the area will be announced shortly." See also Items 414, 420.
The statement was released at Austin, Tex.