Lyndon B. Johnson
September 15, 1967

Citation Accompanying National Security Medal Awarded Posthumously to Desmond FitzGerald.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States posthumously awards the National Security Medal to
DESMOND FITZGERALD
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
in recognition of his outstanding contributions to the national security as set forth in this
CITATION:
As an American of high dedication to the principles upon which our Nation was founded, Mr. FitzGerald on two occasions left the practice of law to offer his unusual talents to his Government. Enlisting as a private in the United States Army in the early days of World War II, Mr. FitzGerald served gallantly and with distinction in the Asiatic-Pacific Theater until his separation as a major after the close of hostilities.
He again volunteered his services to the Nation when, at the outbreak of war in Korea, he became a member of the Central Intelligence Agency. In the following sixteen years, Mr. FitzGerald's exceptional competence and stimulating leadership won the confidence of his associates and established a standard of excellence to guide and inspire others who will follow in the intelligence service of our country. In achieving the remarkable accomplishments that have been of major significance to the United States during periods of world crisis, Mr. FitzGerald gave unstintingly of himself and his energies, of his courage and his imagination. His unchallenged integrity matched only by his passion for anonymity set precedents difficult to follow but of high importance to our Government. Mr. FitzGerald's valuable contribution to the strength of our Nation's foreign intelligence effort upholds the finest traditions of the Federal service.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Note: A White House announcement accompanying the text of the citation stated that the President would present the medal to Mr. FitzGerald's widow in a private ceremony at the White House.
The medal, the announcement noted, was established in 1953 as an award for outstanding contributions in the field of intelligence relating to national security.