Lyndon B. Johnson
September 24, 1968

Proclamation 3871—National Employ the Physically Handicapped Week, 1968

America's program of rehabilitation has brightened the hopes and lives of millions of our citizens who are handicapped by chronic illness or disability.
As a result of advanced medical knowledge, expanded treatment centers, and ingenious prosthetic devices, wounded veterans and disabled workers, children with defects from birth, and young persons injured in accidents can look forward to useful, productive lives.
The ultimate enrichment of the lives of our handicapped is the opportunity to work. Since World War II, over seven million handicapped have been hired by private industry, and nearly a quarter million have been hired by the Federal Government.
While these accomplishments are impressive, the goal of a job for every disabled person who seeks one has not yet been reached.
—Thousands of blind persons arc unemployed.
—Many deaf men and women are in jobs far beneath their true capabilities.
—Epileptics remain the victims of public misinformation and misconception.
—Persons with cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, or muscular dystrophy have shockingly high unemployment rates.
—A disproportionate number of unemployed handicapped men and women are trapped in the urban slums and in the rural areas of our country.
The handicapped have come a long way. But all of us—and particularly those who have been spared crippling injury—must help in providing a still wider range of job opportunities for the handicapped.
Now, Therefore, I, Lyndon B. Johnson,President of the United States of America, in accordance with the joint resolution of Congress approved August 11, 1945 (59 Stat. 530), designating the first full week of October of each year as National Employ the Physically Handicapped Week, do hereby call upon the people of our Nation to observe the week beginning October 6, 1968, for such purpose.
During that week I urge all the Governors of States, mayors of cities, and other public officials, as well as leaders of industry, educational and religious groups, labor, civic, veterans', agricultural, women's, scientific, professional, and fraternal organizations, and all other interested organizations and individuals, including the handicapped themselves, to participate in this observance.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand this twenty-fourth day of September, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-eight, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and ninety-third.


LYNDON B. JOHNSON