Lyndon B. Johnson
September 09, 1966

Letter to the Secretary of the Treasury in Response to His Report on Management Improvements in the Coast Guard.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
I have read the memoranda on the recent management improvements made by the Coast Guard.
These improvements provide a clear example of how management of an organization, using modern techniques and imagination, can achieve simultaneously several objectives of this Administration. In this case, current operating costs were reduced, resources were made available for new programs, services to the public were improved, and a significant contribution to the balance of payments was made.
This sets a good example for all of us, particularly those who continue to insist that we cannot achieve more program results and maintain our pressure on reducing costs at the same time.
Please pass on to your associates in the Department and, in particular, to the Coast Guard, my commendation and appreciation for these achievements.

Sincerely,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
[ Honorable Henry H. Fowler, Secretary of the Treasury, Washington, D.C. 20220]
Note: The President's letter was made public as part of a White House release which also included a memorandum to Secretary Fowler from Acting Assistant Secretary of the Treasury James P. Hendrick. In his memorandum Mr. Hendrick reported increased savings in the Coast Guard and, at the same time, a better service to the public. In summary, he noted the following accomplishments:
"Consolidation of facilities has released resources. "Released resources have been shifted to meet urgent needs which have resulted in savings and cost avoidance in excess of $10 million in capital investments, as well as $1 million in annual operating costs.
"Use of surplus facilities of another agency has eliminated need for acquisition of new facilities.
"Units relocated from U.S. communities are small in size, thereby minimizing the economic impact on the vacated area.
"Improvement has been realized in balance of payments in the amount of $500,000 per year."
The full text of the memorandum is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 2, p. 1254).