Lyndon B. Johnson
September 24, 1964

Remarks Upon Presenting the Collier Trophy in Aeronautics to Clarence L. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:
Through the year we are privileged to welcome here distinguished visitors from many distinguished places. This occasion today, however, is something of a first. I am honored to receive and to welcome the most distinguished citizen of that most unique and distinguished corner of our land, the "Skunk Works."
"Kelly" Johnson and the products of his famous "Skunk Works" epitomize the highest and the finest goal of our society, the goal of excellence. His record of design achievement in aviation is both incomparable and virtually incredible. Any one of his many airplane designs would have honored any individual's career.
Twenty years ago, in 1944, he produced America's first production jet. It was called the P-So, "Shooting Star." This year of 1964 two of our leading breakthroughs in aircraft development have once again borne the "Kelly" Johnson trademark. I suppose I might give a testimonial personally as a satisfied customer. I am very fond of what the newspapermen call "Air Force One-Half," the Jet Star which came from Mr. Johnson's drawing board.
So it is a pleasure and a great privilege to me to personally be able to participate in the presentation of the Robert J. Collier Trophy. This trophy is one of the most honored in aeronautics. It was established in 1912. It is being presented here today for the 49th time.
The Collier Trophy is administered by the National Aeronautics Association. Its annual presentation is sponsored by Look magazine. Last year the Collier Trophy was awarded to the great Mercury team of our astronauts.
There are those who feel that "Kelly" Johnson is a one-man team himself. He works by a rule that is wise for us all: be quick; be quiet; be on time. I have commended that rule, Mr. Johnson, to my staff here at the White House. And I only hope that their products will be comparable to your own.
So on behalf of all the people of the United States, I take great pleasure this morning and great pride in honoring a distinguished American, one who is making a very great contribution to his country and a very great contribution to the cause of freedom for us all in our time.
Note: The President spoke at noon in the Rose Garden at the White House. Clarence L. Johnson was serving as vice president for advance development projects at the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation in Burbank, Calif. The "Skunk Works" was his workshop in Burbank where a number of top-secret projects had been developed.