Lyndon B. Johnson
September 09, 1965

Remarks at the Unveiling of the Design for a Commemorative Stamp Honoring Adlai Stevenson.
Members of the Stevenson family, Mr. Vice President, the distinguished leadership and Members of the Congress, Postmaster General Gronouski, friends and associates of Adlai Stevenson, ladies and gentlemen:
We meet here today to share an act of remembrance. Less than 2 years ago, Adlai Stevenson took part in a ceremony honoring the memory of Eleanor Roosevelt with a commemorative stamp. He said of her that she was a symbol of man's humanity to man.
So, today, in honoring him we honor another whose life speaks to us of the brighter side of man's nature--the side of service and the love of our fellows.
I will not now add to the many words which have been said in his praise. It is sufficient to know, as Winston Churchill once said, that he has left a lonesome place against the sky.
For almost two decades, Adlai Stevenson skillfully and beautifully helped shape the dialog of 20th century democracy. The possibilities that he revealed, the horizons that he opened, and the dangers of which he warned are today the central concern of the United States of America.

I know they are my concern.
Above all, he taught that the goals of America, and the road we must travel to reach them, could be followed consistently with the most noble of our ideals. Indeed, there could be no other way.
What more can be said of a public man than this: He believed in man. He revealed the prospects of peace. And in his own life he served the cause of mankind just as he so eloquently proclaimed it.
Note: The President spoke at 11:32 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. In his opening words he referred to Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey and Postmaster General John A. Gronouski.
The ceremony was attended by Mr. Stevenson's sons, Borden and Adlai E. Stevenson 3d, and by his sister, Mrs. Ernest Ives.
The stamp, a picture of Adlai Stevenson with the United Nations emblem in the background, was issued by the Post Office Department on October 3, 1965, at Bloomington, Ill., where Mr. Stevenson is buried.
For Mr. Stevenson's remarks on October 11, 1963, at the ceremony marking the issuance of the Eleanor Roosevelt Commemorative Stamp, see "Public Papers of the Presidents, John F. Kennedy 1963," Item 408.
See also Items 355, 356, 359, this volume.