Benjamin Harrison
February 01, 1892

Proclamation 318—Modifications of the Tariff Laws of Great Britain

Whereas, pursuant to section 3 of the act of Congress approved October 1, 1890, entitled "An act to reduce the revenue and equalize duties on imports, and for other purposes," the attention of the Government of Great Britain was called to the action of the Congress of the United States of America, with a view to secure reciprocal trade, in declaring the articles enumerated in said section 3 to be exempt from duty upon their importation into the United States of America; and
Whereas the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Great Britain at Washington has communicated to the Secretary of State the fact that, in view of the act of Congress above cited, the Government of Great Britain has by due legal enactment authorized the admission, from and after February 1, 1892, of the articles in merchandise named in the following schedules, on the terms stated therein, into the British colonies of Trinidad (which includes Tobago), Barbados, the Leeward Islands (consisting of the islands of Antigua, Montserrat, St. Christopher, Nevis, Dominica, with their respective dependencies, and the Virgin Islands), the Windward Islands (consisting of St. Lucia, St. Vincent, and their dependencies, but exclusive of Grenada and its dependencies), and into the colony of British Guiana on and after April 1, 1892:
TABLE NO. I.--APPLICABLE TO BRITISH GUIANA, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, BARBADOS, THE LEEWARD ISLANDS, AND THE WINDWARD ISLANDS EXCEPTING THE ISLAND OF GRENADA.
SCHEDULE A.
Articles to be admitted free of all customs duty and any other national, colonial, or municipal charges:
1. Animals, alive, to include only asses, sheep, goats, hogs, and poultry, and horses for breeding.
2. Beef, including tongues, smoked and dried.
3. Beef and pork preserved in cans.
4. Belting for machinery, of leather, canvas, or India rubber.
5. Boats and lighters.
6. Books,* bound or unbound, pamphlets, newspapers, and printed matter in all languages
*The importation of books is subject to the provisions of copyright laws.
7. Bones and horns.
8. Bottles of glass or stone ware.
9. Bran, middlings, and shorts.
10. Bridges of iron or wood, or of both combined.
11. Brooms, brushes, and whisks of broom straw.
12. Candles, tallow.
13. Carts, wagons, cars, and barrows, with or without springs, for ordinary roads and agricultural use, not including vehicles of pleasure.
14. Clocks, mantel or wall.
15. Copper, bronze, zinc, and lead articles, plain and nickel plated, for industrial and domestic uses and for building.
16. Cotton seed and its products.
17. Crucibles and melting pots of all kinds.
18. Eggs.
19. Fertilizers of all kinds, natural and artificial.
20. Fish, fresh or on ice, and salmon and oysters in cans.
21. Fishing apparatus of all kinds.
22. Fruits and vegetables, fresh and dried, when not canned, tinned, or bottled.
23. Gas fixtures and pipes.
24. Gold and silver coin of the United States, and bullion.
25. Hay and straw for forage.
26. Houses of wood, complete.
27. Ice.
28. India-rubber and gutta-percha goods, including waterproof clothing made wholly or in part thereof.
29. Implements, utensils, and tools for agriculture, exclusive of cutlasses and fork
30. Lamps and lanterns.
31. Lime of all kinds.
32. Locomotives, railway rolling stock, rails, railway ties, and all materials appliances for railways and tramways.
33. Marble or alabaster, in the rough or squared, worked or carved, for building purposes or monuments.
34. Medicinal extracts and preparations of all kinds, including proprietary or patent medicines, but exclusive of quinine or preparations of quinine, opium, gauge, and bhang.
35. Paper of all kinds for printing.
36. Paper of wood or straw for wrapping and packing, including surface coated glazed.
37. Photographic apparatus and chemicals.
38. Printers' ink, all colors.
39. Printing presses, types, rules, spaces, and all accessories for printing.
40. Quicksilver.
41. Resin, tar, pitch, and turpentine.
42. Salt.
43. Sewing machines and all parts and accessories thereof.
44. Shipbuilding materials and accessories of all kinds, when used in the construction, equipment, or repair of vessels or boats of any kind, except rope and cordage of all kinds, including wire rope.
45. Starch of Indian corn or maize.
46. Steam and power engines, and machines, machinery, and apparatus, whether stationary or portable, worked by power or by hand, for agriculture, irrigation, mining, the arts and industries of all kinds, and all necessary parts and appliances for the erection or repair thereof or the communication of motive power thereto.
47. Steam boilers and steam pipes.
48. Sulphur.
49. Tan bark of all kinds, whole or ground.
50. Telegraph wire, telegraphic, telephonic, and electrical apparatus and appliances of all kinds for communication or illumination.
51. Trees, plants, vines, and seeds and grains of all kinds, for propagation or cultivation.
52. Varnish, not containing spirits.
53. Wall papers.
54. Watches when not cased in gold or silver, and watch movements uncased.
55. Water pipes of all classes, materials, and dimensions.
56. Wire for fences, the hooks, staples, nails, and the like appliances for fastening the same.
57. Yeast cake and baking powders.
58. Zinc, tin, and lead, in sheets, asbestus, and tar paper, for roofing.
It is understood that the packages or coverings in which the articles named in the foregoing schedule are imported shall be free of duty if they are usual and proper for the purpose.
SCHEDULE B.
Articles to be admitted at 50 per cent reduction of the duty designated in the respective customs tariff now in force in each of said colonies:
1. Bacon and bacon hams.
2. Boots and shoes made wholly or in part of leather.
3. Bread and biscuit.
4. Cheese.
5. Lard and its compound.
6. Mules.
7. Oleomargarine.
8. Shooks and staves.
SCHEDULE C.
Articles to be admitted at 55 per cent reduction of the duty designated in the respective customs tariff now in force in each of said colonies:
1. Beef, salted or pickled.
2. Corn or maize.
3. Corn meal.
4. Flour of wheat.
5. Lumber of pitch pine, in rough or prepared for buildings.
6. Petroleum and its products, crude or refined.
7. Pork, salted or pickled.
8. Wheat.
It is understood that No. 4 of this schedule shall not apply to the colony of Trinidad, but it is stipulated that the duty on flour in said colony shall not exceed 75 cents per barrel.
And that the Government of Great Britain has by due legal enactment authorized the admission, from and after February 1, 1892, of the articles or merchandise named in the following schedules, on the terms stated therein, into the British colony of Jamaica and its dependencies:
TABLE NO. 2.--APPLICABLE TO THE COLONY OF JAMAICA AND ITS
DEPENDENCIES.
SCHEDULE A.
Articles to be admitted free of all customs duty and any other national, colonial, or municipal charges:
1. Animals, alive, and poultry.
2. Beef, including tongues, smoked and dried.
3. Beef and pork preserved in cans.
4. Belting for machinery, of leather, canvas, or india rubber.
5. Boats and lighters.

6. Books,* bound or unbound, pamphlets, newspapers, and printed matter in all languages.
7. Bones and horns.
*The importation or books is subject to the provisions of copyright laws.
8. Bottles of glass or stone ware.
9. Bran, middlings, and shorts.
10. Bridges of iron or wood, or of both combined.
11. Brooms, brushes, and whisks of broom straw.
12. Candles, tallow.
13. Carts, wagons, cars, and barrows, with or without springs, for ordinary roads and agricultural use, not including vehicles of pleasure.
14. Coal and coke.
15. Clocks, mantel or wall.
16. Cotton seed and its products, to include meal, meal cake, oil, and cottolene.
17. Crucibles and melting pots of all kinds
18. Drawings, paintings, engravings, lithographs, and photographs
19. Eggs.
20. Fertilizers of all kinds, natural and artificial.
21. Fish, fresh or on ice, and oysters in cans.
22. Fishing apparatus of all kinds.
23. Fruits and vegetables, fresh and dried, when not canned, tinned, or bottled.
24. Gas fixtures and pipes.
25. Gold and silver coin of the United States, and bullion.
26. Hay and straw for forage.
27. Houses of wood, complete.
28. Ice.
29. India-rubber and gutta-percha goods, including waterproof clothing wholly or in part thereof.
30. Implements, utensils, and tools for agriculture, exclusive of cutlasses and forks,
31, Iron, galvanized.
32. Iron for roofing.
33. Lamps and lanterns, not exceeding 10 shillings each in value.
34. Lime of all kinds.
35. Locomotives, railway rolling stock, rails, railway ties, and all materials and appliances for railways and tramways.
36. Marble or alabaster, in the rough or squared, worked or carved, for building purposes or monuments.
37. Paper of all kinds for printing.
38. Paper of wood or straw for wrapping and packing, including surface coated or glazed.
39. Photographic apparatus and chemicals.
40. Printers' ink, all colors.
41. Printing presses, types, rules, spaces, and all accessories for printing.
42. Proprietary or patent medicines, recommended by their proprietors as calculated to cure disease or alleviate pain in the human subject.
43. Quicksilver.
44. Resin, tar, pitch, and turpentine.
45. Sewing machines and all parts and accessories thereof.
46. Shipbuilding materials and accessories of all kinds, when used in the construction, equipment, or repair of vessels or boats of any kind, except rope and cordage of all kinds, including wire rope, and subject to specific regulations to avoid abuse in the importation.
47. Shooks and staves.
48. Starch of Indian corn or maize.
49. Steam and power engines, and machines, machinery, and apparatus, whether stationary or portable, worked by power or by hand, for agriculture, irrigation, mining, the arts and industries of all kinds, and all necessary parts and appliances for the erection or repair thereof or the communication of motive power thereto.
50. Steam boilers and steam pipes.
51. Sugar, refined.
52. Sulphur.
53. Tallow and animal greases.
54. Tan bark of all kinds, whole or ground.
55. Telegraph wire, telegraphic, telephonic, and electrical apparatus and appliances of all kinds for communication or illumination.
56. Trees, plants, vines, and seeds and grains of all kinds for propagation or cultivation.
57. Varnish, not containing spirits.
58. Wall papers.
59. Watches when not cased in gold or silver, and watch movements uncased.
60. Water pipes of all classes, materials, and dimensions.
61. Wire for fences, with the hooks, staples, nails, and the like appliances for fastening the same.
62. Yeast cake and baking powders.
63. Zinc, tin, and lead, in sheets, asbestus, and tar paper, for roofing.
It is understood that the packages or coverings in which the articles named in the foregoing schedule are imported shall be free of duty if they are usual and proper for the purpose.
SCHEDULE B.
Articles to be admitted at 50 per cent reduction of the duty designated in the customs tariff now in force:
1. Bacon and bacon hams.
2. Bread and biscuit.
3. Butter.
4. Cheese.
5. Lard and its compounds.
Lumber of pitch pine, in rough or prepared for buildings, to be reduced to 9 shillings per 1,000 feet.
SCHEDULE C.
Articles to be admitted at 25 Per cent reduction of the duty designated in the toms tariff now in force:
1. Beef, salted or pickled.
2. Corn and maize.
3. Corn meal.
4. Oats.
5. Petroleum and its products, crude or refined.
6. Pork, salted or pickled.
7. Wheat.
And whereas the Secretary of State has, by my direction, given the assurance to the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Great Britain at Washington that this action of the Government of Great Britain in granting remissions and alterations of duties in the British colonies above mentioned is accepted as a due reciprocity for the action of Congress as set forth in section 3 of said act:
Now, therefore, be it known that I, Benjamin Harrison, President of the United States of America, have caused the above-stated modifications of the tariff laws of the aforesaid British colonies to be made public for the information of the citizens of the United States of America.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this 1st day of February, 1892, and of the Independence of the United States of America, the one hundred and sixteenth.
BENJ. HARRISON
By the President:
JAMES G. BLAINE,Secretary of State.