John F. Kennedy
April 30, 1962

Proclamation 3470—National Maritime Day, 1962

Whereas1962 is the year in which the world's first nuclear-powered merchant ship, the N.S. Savannah, first went to sea; and
Whereasthe N.S. Savannah will visit many of the ports of our Nation during the remainder of this year; and
Whereas, in the years to come, this nuclear-powered merchant ship will demonstrate to the peoples of the world the intent of the United States of America to use the atom for peaceful purposes; and
Whereasthe citizens of this Nation may take justifiable pride in the building of this ship and in its future dedication to our peaceful trade and world commerce; and
Whereasit is in the service of our trade and commerce that the American Merchant Marine provides a vital link between this Nation and the other nations of the free world; and
Whereasthe Congress, by a joint resolution approved May 20, 1933 (48 Stat. 73), designated May 22 at National Maritime Day, in commemoration of the departure from Savannah, Georgia, on May 22, 1819, of the S.S. Savannah on the first transoceanic voyage by any steamship, and requested the President to issue a proclamation annually calling for the observance of that day:
Now, Therefore, I, John F. Kennedy,President of the United States of America, do hereby urge the citizens of the United States to honor our American Merchant Marine on Tuesday, May 22, 1962 by displaying the flag of the United States at their homes and other suitable places; and I direct the appropriate officials of the Government to arrange for the display of the flag on all Government buildings on that day.
I also request that all ships sailing under the American flag dress ship on Tuesday, May 22, in tribute to the American Merchant Marine.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this thirtieth day of April in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-two, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-sixth.


JOHN F. KENNEDY
By the President:

GEORGE W. BALL,

Acting Secretary of State