John F. Kennedy
April 18, 1963

Executive Order 11106—Providing for the Administration of the Trade Agreements Program and Related Matters
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 (76 Stat. 872), Section 350 of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (19 U.S.C. 1351), and Section 301 of title 3 of the United States Code, and as President of the United States, it is ordered that Executive Order No. 11075 of January 15, 1963 (28 F.R. 473), be, and it is hereby, amended as follows:
SECTION 1. Amend the heading of the order to read "ADMINISTRATION OF THE TRADE AGREEMENTS PROGRAM".
SEC. 2. In Section 1, substitute"Definitions.(a)" for"Definition.", and add the following new subsection (b):
"(b ) As used in this order the term 'the trade agreements program' includes all activities consisting of, or related to, the negotiation or administration of trade agreements (other than treaties) concluded pursuant to the authority vested in the President by the Constitution, S 350 of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended, or the Act."
SEC. 3. Amend Section 2 to read as follows:
"SEC. 2.Office of Special Representative.(a) There is hereby established in the Executive Office of the President an agency which shall be known as the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations.
"(b) There shall be at the head of the said Office the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations provided for in Section 241 of the Act (hereinafter referred to as the Special Representative), who shall be directly responsible to the President.
"(c) There shall be in the said Office a Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations with the rank of Ambassador, whose principal functions shall be to conduct negotiations under title II of the Act, and who shall perform such additional duties as the Special Representative may direct."
SEC. 4. In Section 3, amend subsection (b) to read as follows:
"(b) The Special Representative shall advise and assist the President in the administration of, and facilitate the carrying out of, the trade agreements program. In addition, the Special Representative shall advise the President with respect to non-tariff barriers to international trade, international commodity agreements, and other matters which are related to the trade agreements program."
SEC. 5. In subsection (c) of Section 3, substitute "trade agreements program" for "Act" in each place that word appears.
SEC. 6. In Section 3, delete subsection (i), redesignate subsection (h) as subsection (i), and insert the following new subsection (h) :
"(h) After the President has entered into a trade agreement which provides for any new tariff concession, the Special Representative shall submit to the President, for transmission by him to each House of Congress, copies of such trade agreement, together with a draft of the statement relating thereto provided for in Section 226 of the Act. In addition, the Special Representative shall transmit to each House of Congress copies of agreements supplementary to trade agreements which do not provide for any new tariff concession, and of such other documents relating to the trade agreements program as he considers appropriate, together with a brief statement describing each such supplementary agreement or other document."
SEC. 7. In Section 3, add the following new subsection (1) at the end of the section:
"(1) The Special Representative shall prepare or have prepared for consideration by the President, in a form suitable for inclusion in title 48 of the Code of Federal Regulations, any proclamation which relates wholly or primarily to the trade agreements program. Any such proclamation shall be subject, to the provisions of Executive Order No. 11030 of June 19, 1962 (27 F.R. 5847), except that such proclamation need not be submitted for approval to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget as provided in Sections 2 (a) and (b) of that order but may be transmitted directly to the Attorney General for his consideration as to both form and legality."
SEC. 8. In Section 4, redesignate subsection (f) as subsection (g), and insert the following new subsection (f) :
"(f) Before making recommendations to the President under Section 242(b) (2) of the Act, the Committee shall, through the Special Representative, request the advice of the Adjustment Assistance Advisory Board, created by the provisions of Section 361 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, concerning the feasibility of adjustment assistance to workers and firms."
SEC. 9. In Section 9, insert "or this order" after "the Act".
SEC. 10. Substitute "13 (b)" for "12 (b)" in Section 12 (a), renumber Sections 11 and 12 as Sections 12 and 13, respectively, and insert the following new Section 11:
"SEC. 11.Redelegation.Delegations of authority made by this order to the Special Representative, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Secretary of Labor, and other assignments of authority made by this order to the Special Representative, shall be deemed to include the power of successive redelegation."
Section 2 of Executive Order No. 11075 of January 15, 1963 (28 F.R. 473), as amended by Section 3 of this order shall be deemed to have become effective January 15, 1963; and said Executive Order No. 11075 as amended shall be codified under title 48 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
JOHN F. KENNEDY

THE WHITE HOUSE,

April 18, 1963