John F. Kennedy
April 28, 1961

Remarks Recorded for Broadcast During the Annual Civil Defense Exercises.
Fellow Americans:
The annual civil defense exercise of which this broadcast is a part is a test of our program of peaceful preparedness. We do not expect war. However, common prudence demands that we take all necessary measures to protect our homes, our institutions, and our way of life, so that they can survive should an enemy thrust war upon us.
Should the United States ever be subjected to direct enemy attack Conelrad and the National Emergency Broadcasting System will be vital to our defense. This carefully planned program would prevent an enemy from using our radio stations to assist him, and yet permits emergency broadcasting such as you now hear. The voluntary participation of the radio and television broadcasters of the nation at their own expense is a commendable example of individual responsibility which is so essential to the survival of this Nation.
In the whole area of civil defense there is the same requirement. It is true that your government, too, must fulfill its responsibility in civil defense with vigorous leadership. To this end I have directed an intensive study of the whole subject of emergency planning. It is also true, however, that individual preparedness, which is beyond the province of government, is essential to an effective civil defense. For unless individual Americans plan to protect their own families--the most ambitious and carefully organized activities of government will prove inadequate.
We are a people of strong faith in ourselves and in our institutions. We believe that our freedom and our liberty are worth protecting.
Therefore, I ask you to support civil emergency planning in your local communities.
To those participating in this 3-day exercise, I express my appreciation for your active response to the obligations of citizenship in a free country.
Note: The President's remarks were broadcast at 4 p.m. on the two Conelrad channels while all commercial TV and radio stations were silent.