John F. Kennedy
April 24, 1963

Statement by the President on the Report of the Committee on Youth Employment.
WHEN I appointed the Committee on Youth Employment in November 1961, I expressed my deep concern over the serious plight of our unemployed youth. No nation can neglect the development of its young people without courting catastrophe. Yet, as the report I have received today points out, we as a Nation are not doing all that we can to see to it that all our young people are given the opportunity to prepare themselves for a complex and ever-evolving domestic economy, and a highly dangerous world situation.
We are condoning over-crowded, ill-equipped schools in many areas of the country.
We are apathetic toward the defeatism, born of social and economic "exile," that afflicts the hearts and minds of many modern slum dwellers, and the cynical attitude this produces in slum youth.
We are permitting many of our talented young workers to be relegated to menial jobs, or to stark unemployment, merely because of the accident of race.
We are not doing enough to stem the tide of school dropouts, and to find means of training those who drop out of school.
The Nation owes a debt of gratitude to the members of the Committee on Youth Employment for bringing these problems to the attention of the American people, and for suggesting some solutions. What is needed now is grassroots action to put the Committee's recommendations to work. Apathy must be replaced by concern. Communities across the country must face their youth unemployment problems and develop proposals for their solution.
For this reason, I hope this report receives widespread attention throughout the Nation. You can be sure that the Committee's recommendations will receive intensive study and consideration by this administration.
One of the Committee's recommendations can and should be enacted into law promptly. Its proposal for a Federal program of "urban and conservation employment and training" is embodied in the Youth Employment Act which already has been passed by the Senate and is now being considered by the House of Representatives. I urge passage of this bill by the House as rapidly as possible.
Finally, I extend to the Committee members my personal thanks for its year-long effort in developing an overall plan for a vitally important task. The Committee's continued support, assistance, and advice will be needed as we take further action to meet "the challenge of jobless youth."
Note: For the President's statement upon establishing the Committee, see 1961 volume, this series, Item 470.
See also Item 141, above.