John F. Kennedy
April 12, 1962

Statement by the President following a Meeting With General Clay on the Berlin Situation.
GENERAL CLAY and I have had a thorough discussion of the situation in Berlin and of his own role in it. General Clay has served for several months beyond the duration of this assignment as originally expected. He has served with great effectiveness in helping to sustain the close partnership and mutual understanding of the people of West Berlin with the United States in a time of grave danger.
While there is still no settlement of the differences among the great powers over Germany and Berlin, and while the defense of the freedom of West Berlin remains a matter of the highest concern to the United States, General Clay has reported to me that the morale and economy of the city are such that his full-time presence as my Personal Representative is no longer required. This is particularly true as allied planning and coordination have advanced rapidly in the last several months.
While personal considerations would not lead General Clay to ask to be relieved in time of emergency, he should not be called upon to stay indefinitely when his immediate mission is over. With regard to his work in Berlin, General Clay's contributions to the situation there are too well known to require comment other than to say that I am glad that he will remain in service on call as my adviser on matters relating to Berlin. In this capacity, he will be returning to the city at frequent intervals in future months, and in case of emergency he is only eight hours away from the city. He will go back to Berlin Sunday where he will remain for a few weeks.
General Clay has made a great contribution in the last autumn and winter, and it is good that this contribution will continue as he comes home from full-time service.
Note: The appointment of Gen. Lucius D. Clay as the President's Personal Representative in Berlin, with rank of Ambassador, was announced on August 30, 1961 (see 1961 volume, this series, Item 334 [3]).