John F. Kennedy
April 18, 1963

Proclamation 3528—Loyalty Day, 1963

Dedication, devotion, and loyalty to our country and to the free democratic precepts upon which it was founded has always been a cherished tradition with our people-from our Founding Fathers to our servicemen now serving in the far-flung corners of the world. Understandably, our people avoid ostentatious displays of patriotic fervor. Nevertheless, in these trying times, when international forces are attempting to undermine and destroy our form of free government and our way of life, it is entirely fitting and proper and in the national interest to set aside a special day each year on which to express our unceasing devotion and loyalty to this Nation. To this end, the Congress, by a joint resolution of July 18, 1958 (72 Stat. 369), has designated May 1 of each year as Loyalty Day and has requested the President to issue a proclamation inviting the people of the United States to observe that day with appropriate ceremonies.
Now, Therefore, I, John F. Kennedy,President of the United States of America do hereby call upon the people of the United States, and upon all patriotic, civic, and educational organizations to observe Wednesday, May 1, 1963, as Loyalty Day, in schools and other suitable places with appropriate ceremonies in which all of our people may join in a reaffirmation of their loyalty to the United States of America.
I also call upon appropriate officials of the Government to display the flag of the United States on all Government buildings on that day as a manifestation of our loyalty to the Nation which that flag symbolizes.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this 18th day of April in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-three, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-seventh.


JOHN F. KENNEDY
By the President:

DEAN RUSK,

Secretary of State