John F. Kennedy
April 05, 1961

Proclamation 3404—Citizenship Day and Constitution Week, 1961

Whereasthe growth of our Nation and the safeguarding of its principles of liberty, justice, and opportunity rest upon the Constitution of the United States; and
Whereasit is most fitting in these crucial times that all citizens, naturalized and native-born, pledge themselves anew to preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution and to rededicate themselves to the service of our country; and
Whereasby a joint resolution approved February 29, 1952 (66 Stat. 9), the Congress designated the seventeenth day of September of each year as Citizenship Day in commemoration of the signing of the Constitution on September 17, 1787, and in recognition of those citizens who have come of age and those who have been naturalized during the year; and
Whereasby a joint resolution approved August 2, 1956 (70 Stat. 932), the Congress requested the President to designate the week beginning September 17 of each year as Constitution Week-a time for the study and observance of the acts and events which resulted in the formation of the Constitution; and
Whereasthose resolutions of the Congress authorize the President to issue annually a proclamation calling for the observance of Citizenship Day and of Constitution Week:
Now, Therefore, I, John F. Kennedy,President of the United States of America, call upon the appropriate officials of the Government to display the flag of the United States on all Government buildings on Citizenship Day, September 17, 1961; and I urge Federal, State, and local officials, as well as all religious, civic, educational, and other organizations, to hold appropriate ceremonies on that day to inspire all our citizens to keep the faith of our Founding Fathers and to carry out the ideals of United States citizenship.
I also designate the period beginning September 17 and ending September 23, 1961, as Constitution Week; and I urge the people of the United States to observe that week with appropriate ceremonies and activities in their schools and churches and in other suitable places to the end that our citizens may achieve a better understanding and a deeper appreciation of the Constitution.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this fifth day of April in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred, and eighty-fifth.


JOHN F. KENNEDY
By the President:

DEAN RUSK,

Secretary of State.