John F. Kennedy
April 16, 1962

Remarks at a White House Musical Program for Youth.
Ladies and gentlemen:
Mrs. Kennedy and I want to welcome all of you to the White House and to this third in a series of musical afternoons arranged by some of our most active teachers and demonstrating the talents of some of our most gifted boys and girls.
I'm particularly glad to welcome this youth orchestra from greater Boston. And also, from Texas, to welcome the Breckenridge Choir which is going to sing some songs of Texas and of the United States.
We're also glad to welcome Members of the Congress--and Senator Yarborough and the Vice President's daughter, I believe, come from the same State as the choir--and Congressman Burieson, I think, who represents their District in the Congress--and also all of you from parts of Washington.
One of our great assets in this country are the talented boys and girls who devote their early lives to music, to appreciation of music, to an understanding of it. This is a great and I think vital force in American life. It is a part of American life which I think is somewhat unheralded around the world. But this emphasis upon artistic achievement in music I think is a source of satisfaction and pride to all of us.

I want to congratulate all the teachers who are involved with these boys and girls-from Texas and from Massachusetts--who are symbolic of the hundreds of thousands of dedicated teachers from all parts of the United States who are attempting to give to young boys and girls the same enthusiasm and discipline which has been given to them by other teachers.
So you are very welcome to this house, which belongs to all of you, and to these grounds. We are proud to have you here. I never heard the Star Spangled Banner played with more enthusiasm and precision-and we are looking forward to listening to all of you. And as I said last year, I will keep the door of my office open all afternoon.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke on the South Lawn at the White House.
The Greater Boston Youth Symphony Orchestra, under the direction of Marvin Rabin, and the Breckenridge Boys Choir of Breckenridge, Tex., directed by Mrs. Ben L Dean, Jr., entertained more than 600 junior and senior high school students in the third of Mrs. Kennedy's "musical programs for youth by youth."
Among the guests from Texas to whom the President referred were Ralph Yarborough, U.S. Senator, Omar Burieson, U.S. Representative, and the Vice President's daughter, Lynda Bird Johnson.