John F. Kennedy
August 29, 1962

Remarks to a Group of Junior Red Cross Representatives from Abroad.
I AM GLAD to welcome you all to the White House. General, we appreciated your thought about having them come by and see us. I'm glad to see so many here from so many different countries. Maybe we could just get you all identified now. Who's here from Austria? Just hold up your hands. Belgium? Bolivia? Canada? Chile? Colombia? Ecuador? Finland? France? West Germany? Great Britain? Greece? Guatemala? Honduras? India? Indonesia? Iran? Italy? Japan? South Korea? Lebanon? Liberia? Luxembourg? Mexico? Monaco? Morocco? Netherlands? New Zealand? Nicaragua? Nigeria? Pakistan? Panama? Peru? The Philippines? Poland? Sweden-Svenska? Switzerland? Thailand? Togo? Turkey? United Arab Republic? Yugoslavia? How about the rest of you? Where is Miss Vera Dojoinovic? United States? General, you hold up your hand.
We're glad to have you here, and I must say I think it's most encouraging to have people from so many different countries, including countries where the Government leaders don't always get on, but I think the people do, and I think that it's a very good reminder to all of us. What hopes we can have for the future and our hopes are in all of you, and also in the very important work that the Red Cross, Red Crescent, and the Red Lion and Sun all do for suffering people everywhere. There are no national boundaries to that issue, and there is only a question of whether we can extend a helping hand.
I congratulate all of you for your interest in this cause. It's most worthwhile. Whether you help someone in your own country or in some foreign country the general cause is served. So we're very glad to have you here. I'm sure your families are proud of you, and your countries, and as a great believer in the cause in which you're engaged, I'm very proud of you. So we're happy to have you here.
Note: The President spoke at 11 a.m. on the South Lawn at the White House. During his remarks he referred to Vera Dojcinovic of Belgrade, one of the representatives from Yugoslavia.
The group, composed of 112 representatives of the Red Cross, Red Crescent, and Red Lion and Sun Societies from 42 countries, was introduced by Gen. Alfred M. Gruenther, Chairman of the American National Red Cross.