John F. Kennedy
August 28, 1962

Remarks to Members of the Executive Committee of American Heritage foundation.
Mr. Brophy, gentlemen:
I want to congratulate the American Heritage foundation for its effort to once again bring to the attention of the American people the importance of participating in political activity. This participation is an essential part of being a responsible citizen, and in these very important days, when our country bears great responsibilities, I do think it vitally important that every citizen votes, that he supports the party of his choice, that he be informed of the issues, and that he be registered and turn out in November.
The American Heritage foundation has brought together some startling statistics of the rather regrettable lack of interest, particularly in the off years when we elect the entire House of Representatives and one-third of the Senate. In 1958 the percentage of our civilians of voting age who went to the polls was only 43 percent, which means that a majority of our people did not vote.

The activities of the National Government affect the lives of all of our citizens. And I hope that all of our citizens will participate in the selection of their national Government, their Congress, their other leaders in the State legislatures, in the Governors' chairs.
This is a very vital business, running a democracy, and it needs the help of all of our citizens, so I want to congratulate the American Heritage foundation for its effort on a nonpartisan basis to remind us of a very fundamental obligation. I must say that I am registered, I am supporting the party of my choice, and I intend to vote in November.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at noon in the fish Room at the White House following introductory remarks by Thomas D'Arcy Brophy, member of the Board of Trustees, American Heritage foundation. Mr. Brophy spoke briefly on the foundation's 1962 program for encouraging registration and voting and presented the President with one of the information kits developed for use in the program.