John F. Kennedy
December 17, 1961

Remarks at the San Carlos Palace to the American Embassy Staff in Bogota.
I WANT to express our thanks to you for being kind enough to come in from the embassy because we had planned to come out there but we were delayed.
I know that all of us as Americans are most appreciative of the generous reception which the people of this city and country have given us--and given us, really, in the name of the United States. And I know that their friendship for the United States is due in good part to your work here.
What we are anxious for is that the name of the United States and our reputation be identified as much as possible with the progressive interests of all the people. I hope that in all your work, and wherever you go, in all your contacts, that you will try as much as possible to associate yourselves with the well-being of all the people of Colombia, and to emphasize how concerned we are in the United States with the welfare of the people here--and throughout the entire hemisphere.
If we can do that, if the name of the 'United States can be identified with this great cause in the 1960's, then I think the interests of our country and the interests of freedom and the interests of this country are well served.
So I want to congratulate you on what you have done, and also to hope that in the future, as in the past, you will--on every day--attempt to, as much as possible, establish a most intimate relationship with the people of this country, holding out the hand of friendship to them.
You are, in addition to our distinguished Ambassador here, you are all ambassadors. When they see you they see the United States. Therefore, every one of you symbolizes our country, and that is a great responsibility, far greater than it has ever been in the past.
So I am confident that those of you in the military, those of you in the AID program, the Information Service, and in the Foreign Service--those of you who may be secretaries in the embassies, all of you carry with you not only the prestige of the United States but also the reputation of the United States.
So we want to express our thanks to you for being kind enough to come to see us. We are indebted to you. And as I have said, I think the welcome we got today is in good part due to your efforts--and I know that you will continue them.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke in the Cristo Salon at the San Carlos Palace. During his remarks he referred to Fulton Freeman, U.S. Ambassador to Colombia.