John F. Kennedy
December 04, 1962

Remarks Concerning the Part Played by Radio Stations in the Cuban Crisis.
Mr. Murrow, Governor, Mr. Minow:
I want to express our thanks to the radio stations who were so helpful and contributed such an important national service to us during the difficult days that have just passed. We were extremely anxious to get across our point of view, which was the point of view of the free people of this hemisphere, to the people of Cuba in late October and early November.
We, therefore, asked a number of radio stations if they could assist us. The Voice of America broadcasts to Latin America and to Cuba through short wave. We were anxious that medium wave be used and the only device that we could use was the radio stations. We went to all of them. They immediately volunteered their assistance.
None of them put forward all of the objections which they could have in regard to previous programs and previous commitments, but, instead, immediately made their stations available, and from dusk to dawn they broadcast the message of the United States to the people of Cuba.
We are very grateful to them. I think they showed two things: first, how significant radio is in getting across a message beyond national boundaries; and, secondly, they showed how patriotic were those men who ran these stations. We are glad to have them here today.

[At this point the President, assisted by Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, presented certificates of appreciation from the United States to representatives of the 10 radio stations which had been chosen for the Voice of America broadcasts. The President then concluded his remarks. ]
I want to thank you all very much. Ed, do you want to say something?
Note: The President spoke at 11:30 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. Mr. Murrow then expressed his appreciation to the broadcasters "for using their transmitters in the interest of truth."
The President's opening words referred, in addition to Mr. Murrow, to Adlai E. Stevenson, U.S. Representative to the United Nations and former Governor of Illinois, and Newton N. Minow, Chairman, Federal Communications Commission.