John F. Kennedy
December 20, 1961

Statement by the President on the Situation in the Dominican Republic.
I WANT to make special note of the most encouraging developments in the Dominican Republic. The solution to the political difficulties in that country, the principal feature of which is the immediate creation of a council of state, was announced by President Balaguer on December 17 and has now been accepted by the principal elements of the democratic opposition. It represents, in my judgment, an impressive demonstration of statesmanship and responsibility by all concerned. This accomplishment by the democratic opposition and the Dominican government is all the more remarkable when it is recalled that only recently the Dominican Republic emerged from three decades of a harshly repressive regime which dedicated itself to stifling every democratic Dominican voice. This victory of the Dominican people and its leaders is a striking demonstration of the fact that dictatorship can suppress but cannot destroy the aspirations of a people to live in freedom, dignity and peace.
The Dominican people still face long and difficult efforts to transform their aspirations into an effective, soundly-based democratic system. In this struggle, they have the assurance of our sympathetic and tangible support. I understand that the Organization of American States is now considering the lifting of the sanctions imposed upon the Dominican Republic by collective action in August 1960 and January 1961. If the Council of the OAS takes such action--and our representatives are supporting that step we will resume diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic promptly. When this takes place the Department of Agriculture will authorize purchases under the Dominican allocation of non-quota sugar for the first six months of 1962.
In addition, I propose to send, upon the installation of the new council of state, a United States Economic Assistance Mission, headed by Ambassador Teodoro Moscoso of AID and including Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Milton Barall, to visit the Dominican Republic. Its purpose will be to explore emergency requirements and the possibilities for longer-range cooperative programs under the Alliance for Progress, which can be of direct benefit to the Dominican people. I expect that this mission will arrive in the Dominican Republic late this month or very early in January.
I understand that Mr. Felipe Herrera, President of the Inter-American Development Bank, will head a high-level mission to the Dominican Republic in the near future to begin discussions and inquire into economic and social development projects.
These actions are intended to assist the new Dominican government and people in developing a sound economic and social structure, which is indispensable to an enduring democratic political system.
The Dominican people and their leaders confront a great and seldom given opportunity: the construction of a democratic society on the ruins of tyranny. It is a noble task, but it is not an easy one. We wish them well, and we assure them of our desire to assist them in their efforts.
Note: The statement was released at Palm Beach, Fla.