John F. Kennedy
December 13, 1962

Statement by the President on the Report of the President's Science Advisory Committee, "Meeting Manpower Needs in Science and Technology."
EARLIER this year, I requested my Science Advisory Committee to examine the Nation's resources of scientific and technical personnel in relation to the demands being placed upon these resources--for military security, space exploration, economic progress, medical advancement, assistance to developing nations and education of future manpower. The Committee has now submitted the first in a series of reports. In it, the Committee states that this country faces an impending shortage of engineers, mathematicians, and physical scientists who combine high ability with graduate education. The Committee has made recommendations for immediate action.
The problem about which the Committee has expressed most concern is that diverse requirements for the more highly trained engineers, mathematicians, and physical scientists are rapidly outstripping our capability to produce them. To meet this problem, the Committee recommends a concerted program linking both Federal and private efforts to increase the number of those who have selected careers in these three fields to go on to graduate study. Because the program initially would extend training of students who are already in college, it has the advantage of meeting imminent shortages promptly.
The Committee's recommendations call first for augmented financial support of graduate students. Too many college graduates in the past have determined that they could not afford to continue on for advanced training. Many who have begun graduate study drop out prematurely because of financial difficulty.
The Committee also recommends increased funds to meet the universities' costs of training in these three fields so as not to divert funds from other fields of learning; funds to expand the physical plant at existing centers of educational excellence; but also funds to provide a wider geographical dispersion of such centers.
The Federal Council for Science and Technology has reported to me that it concurs with the Committee's analysis on the priority of this need. They also have confirmed the soundness of goals and feasibility of the proposed program to meet these goals.
I have requested that immediate consideration be given to this report in developing legislative and budget proposals which I shall submit to the Congress in January 1963.
Well-trained minds are among this Nation's most precious assets, among the scarcest of our resources. Attainment of our many national objectives and fulfillment of existing commitments critically depend on the quantity, and on the quality, of manpower in all professional fields, at all levels of training. Moreover, success in developing this Nation's necessary manpower resources requires a close relationship between the universities and the Federal Government, industry, private foundations and individuals, state and local governments. Sustained growth of excellence in American engineering and science will depend on the efforts of all.
It is the students themselves, however, who hold the key to this Nation's strength. It is my earnest hope that each college student will consider how valuable additional study will be in enhancing his abilities and potential contribution to the Nation, and in bringing him greater satisfaction and rewards.
JOHN F. KENNEDY
Note: The statement, released in part on December 16 by the White House, was included as a foreword to the report entitled "Meeting Manpower Needs in Science and Technology--Report Number One: Graduate Training in Engineering, Mathematics, and Physical Science" (Government Printing Once, 1962). The report was prepared for the Science Advisory Committee by a Panel on Scientific and Technical Manpower under the chairmanship of Dr. Edwin R. Gilliland, Professor of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, is Chairman of the Committee.