John F. Kennedy
February 18, 1963

Letter to the President of the Senate Transmitting a Report on Water Resources Research.
Dear Mr. President:
I am pleased to transmit herewith a report on the water resources research activities of the executive branch of the Government. This report was prepared by the Federal Council for Science and Technology with the assistance of a Special Task Group on Coordinated Water Resources Research having representation from the several Federal agencies involved.
The study on research in water resources is part of a comprehensive review of Federal research activities in natural resources. As indicated in my special messages to the Congress on natural resources and conservation in 1961 and 1962, the review is being undertaken by the Federal Council for Science and Technology at my direction, to strengthen and unify the total governmental research effort in the natural resources field. I fully subscribed to the view expressed in the covering memorandum by Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Chairman of the Federal Council for Science and Technology, that the study represents an important step in the development of a coordinated program of water resources research recommended by the Select Committee on National Water Resources.
The work of the Task Group on Coordinated Water Resources Research was taken into consideration in framing the administration's request for increased support of water resources research in fiscal year 1964. I commend the report for your consideration in connection with the budget request and the need for new legislation to stimulate research in the field of water resources at the colleges and universities.

Sincerely yours,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
[Hon. Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the Senate, Washington, D.C.]
Note: The report was submitted to the President on February 13. It is published in "Federal Water Resources Research Activities," a Committee Print, dated March 25, 1963, for the Senate Select Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, 88th Congress, 1st session (Government Printing Office).
For the recommendations of the Select Committee on National Water Resources, see Senate Report 29 (87th Cong.).