John F. Kennedy
February 14, 1962

Remarks to the Policy Committee of the Communications Workers of America.
I WANT to welcome you all here this morning. It is a great source of satisfaction to me. I am an old friend of your president, Joe Beirne. In 1947 he and I were 2 of the 10 outstanding young men, according to the Junior Chamber of Commerce. But I do also want to welcome you because yours is an outstanding union, and I am a great believer in the contribution which the union movement can make, not only in this country in maintaining a progressive economy, but also the contribution which the union movement can make around the world.
I stated to the AFL-CIO national convention that the efforts which the AFL-CIO have made around the world to strengthen the free democratic trade union movement, I believe, represented one of the great contributions in the struggle against the Communist advance which has been made in the last 15 to 20 years.
I want to commend you. I know that you are here in Washington taking part in one of the most important assignments which faces your union, to make a determination of what you should do in regard to collective bargaining. I know that Dr. Heller had an opportunity to talk with you yesterday. I want to commend you for the responsible way that you are moving towards your assignment.
We are all concerned not only with advancing the public interest--you have a responsibility towards your members and towards the country, and I am sure that you are going to meet your responsibility to both of these--to your people and to all the American people in maintaining our economy in a way which protects our people, and makes it possible for them to participate more fully in our lives here.
I welcome you to the White House. It belongs to all of you. I welcome you here individually and also because you represent an outstanding American organization, and also because of your distinguished president, whom I regard as one of the outstanding leaders of the American labor movement today. Joe, we are glad to have you all here.
Note: The President spoke at 9:45 a.m. in the Rose Garden at the White House. During his remarks he referred to Walter W. Heller, Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers.