John F. Kennedy
February 26, 1963

Executive Order 11094—Assigning Emergency Preparedness Functions to: The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; The Federal Home Loan Bank Board; The Farm Credit Administration; The Export-Import Bank of Washington; The Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; The Securities and Exchange Commission; The Administrator of the Small Business Administration; and The Administrator of Veterans Affairs
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, including authority vested in me by Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1958 (72 Stat. 1799), it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1.Scope.The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the Farm Credit Administration, the Export-Import Bank of Washington, the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Administrator of the Small Business Administration and the Administrator of Veterans Affairs (hereinafter referred to collectively as Heads of agencies) shall prepare national emergency plans and develop preparedness programs covering functions assigned to them in this order. These plans and programs shall be designed to develop a state of readiness with respect to all conditions of national emergency, including attack upon the United States.
SEC. 2.Financial Plans and Programs.The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the Farm Credit Administration, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, shall participate with the Office of Emergency Planning, the Department of the Treasury, and other agencies in the formulation of emergency financial and stabilization policies. The Heads of such agencies shall, as appropriate, develop emergency plans, programs, and regulations, in consonance with national emergency financial and stabilization plans and policies, to cope with potential economic effects of mobilization or an attack, including, but not limited to, the following:
(a)Money and credit.Provision, restriction, or regulation of money and credit in accordance with the needs of the economy, including the acquisition, decentralization, and distribution of emergency supplies of currency; the collection of cash items and non-cash items; and the conduct of fiscal agency and foreign operations.
(b)Financial institutions.Provision for the continued or resumed operation of banking, savings and loan, and other financial institutions, including measures for the recreation of evidence of assets or liabilities destroyed or inaccessible.
(c)Liquidity.Provision of necessary liquidity to financial institutions including those destroyed or damaged.
(d)Cash withdrawals and credit transfers.Regulation of the distribution and withdrawal of currency and the transfer of credits including deposit and share account balances.
(e) Insurance.Provision for the assumption and discharge of liability pertaining to insured deposits and insured savings accounts or withdrawable shares in financial institutions destroyed or made insolvent.
SEC. 3.Sharing of War Losses.Heads of agencies shall, as appropriate, participate with the Office of Emergency Planning and the Department of the Treasury in the development of policies, plans, and procedures for sharing war losses.
SEC. 4.Securities and Exchange Commission.In addition to its concern with other programs outlined herein, the Commission shall collaborate with the Secretary of the Treasury in the development of emergency financial control plans, programs, procedures, and regulations for:
(a)Stock trading.Temporary closure of security, suspension of redemption rights and freezing of stock and bond prices, if required in the interest of maintaining economic controls.
(b)Modified trading.Development of plans designed to re-establish and maintain a stable and orderly market for securities when the situation permits under emergency conditions.
(c)Protection of securities.Provision of a national records system which will make it possible to establish current ownership of securities in the event major trading centers and depositories are destroyed.
(d)Flow of capital.The control of the formation and flow of private capital as it relates to new securities offerings or expansion of prior offerings for the purpose of establishing or re-establishing industries in relation to the nation's needs in or following a national emergency.
(e)Flight of capital.The prevention of the flight of capital outside this country and the impounding of securities in the hands of enemy aliens.
SEC. 5.Export-Import Bank of Washington.Under foreign policy guidance of the Secretary of State, the Export-Import Bank shall develop plans for the utilization of the resources of the Bank in expansion of productive capacity abroad for essential materials, foreign barter arrangements, acquisition of emergency imports, or in any other manner designed to strengthen the relative position of the Nation and its allies, or to assist neutral nations, and, under guidance of the Secretary of the Treasury, develop plans for the utilization of the Bank's resources in support of the domestic economy and survival of the nation.
SEC. 6.Small Business Administration.The Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall:
(a)Prime contract authority.Develop plans to administer a program for the acquisition of prime contracts by the Administration and, in turn, for negotiating or otherwise letting of subcontracts to capable small business concerns in an emergency.
(b)Resource information.Provide data on facilities inventories and potential production capacity of small business concerns to all interested agencies.
(c)Procurement.Develop plans to determine jointly with Federal procurement agencies, as appropriate, which defense contracts are to go to small business concerns and to certify to the productive and financial ability of small concerns to perform specific contracts, as required.
(d)Loans for plant modernization.Develop plans for providing emergency assistance to essential individual industrial establishments through direct loans or participation loans for the financing of production facilities and equipment.
(e)Resource pools.Develop plans for encouraging and approving small business defense production and research and development pools.
(f)Financial assistance.Develop plans to make loans, directly or in participation with private lending institutions, to small business concerns and to groups or pools of such concerns, to small business investment companies, and to state and local development companies to provide them with funds for lending to small business concerns, for defense and essential civilian purposes.
SEC. 7.The Veterans Administration.The Administrator of Veterans Affairs shall:
(a)Health functions.Assist the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare in the fulfillment of that Department's responsibilities and participate with it in the development of plans and guidance to utilize to the maximum extent the existing health resources of the Veterans Administration.
(b)Veterans benefits.(1) Develop plans for the continuation or restoration of benefits to veterans of previous wars as soon as possible after a direct attack upon the United States and prepare operating plans and programs designed to recognize and care for new veterans.
(2) Develop emergency measures for the conduct of compensation, pension, rehabilitation, and insurance payments consistent with overall Federal plans for the continuation of Federal benefit payments after an enemy attack..
(3) Develop plans and procedures for the emergency conduct of insurance and loan guaranty functions in accordance with indirect stabilization policies and controls designed to deal with various conditions of attack.
SEC. 8.Research.Within the framework of Federal research objectives, Heads of agencies shall supervise, conduct, or recommend research directly concerned with carrying out emergency preparedness responsibilities, designate representatives for necessary ad hoc or task force groups, and provide advice and assistance to other agencies in planning for research in areas involving their agency's interest.
SEC. 9.Cooperation with Department of Defense.In consonance with national civil defense plans, programs, and operations of the Department of Defense under Executive Order No. 10952, Heads of agencies shall, as appropriate:
(a)Facilities protection.Provide facilities protection guidance material adapted to the needs of the facilities and services concerned and promote a national program to stimulate disaster preparedness and control in order to minimize the effects of overt or covert attack on facilities under their jurisdiction or influence. Guidance shall include, but not be limited to, organization and training of facility employees, personnel shelter, evacuation records protection continuity of management, emergency repair, deconcentration or dispersal of facilities, and mutual aid associations for an emergency.
(b)Damage assessment.Maintain a capability to assess the effects of attack on facilities under their jurisdiction and to provide data and assistance to the Department of Defense.
SEC. 10.Functional Guidance.Heads of agencies, in carrying out the functions assigned in this order, shall be guided by the following:
(a) Interagency cooperation.Heads of agencies shall enlist the cooperation of appropriate State authorities and shall coordinate the performance of their emergency preparedness functions with departments and agencies having primary or supporting functions reIated thereto.
(b)Presidential coordination.The Director of the Office of Emergency Planning shall advise and assist the President in determining policy for the performance of functions under this order and in coordinating the performance of such functions with the total national preparedness program.
(c)Emergency planning.Emergency plans and programs and emergency organization structure required thereby, shall be developed as an integral part of the continuing activities of each agency on the basis that it will have the responsibility for carrying out such programs during an emergency. Heads of agencies shall be prepared to implement all appropriate plans developed under this order. Modifications and temporary organizational changes, based on emergency conditions, will be in accordance with policy determinations by the President.
SEC 11.Emergency Actions.Nothing in this order shall be construed as conferring authority under Title III of the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, as amended, or otherwise, to put into effect any emergency plan, procedure, policy, program, or course of action prepared or developed pursuant to this order. Such authority is reserved to the President.
SEC. 12.Resources Evaluation.Heads of agencies shall provide for appropriate participation in the national resources evaluation program administered by the Office of Emergency Planning.
SEC. 13.Redelegation.Heads of agencies are hereby authorized to redelegate within their agencies the functions hereinabove assigned to them.
SEC. 14.Prior Actions.To the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions of any prior order and the provisions of this order, the latter shall control. Emergency Preparedness Order No. 10 (heretofore issued by the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization) (26 F.R. 835), and Defense Mobilization Orders No. 1-20 dated January 15, 1956 (21 F.R. 1127), No. 1-22 dated March 28, 1956 (21 F.R. 2043), and 1-24 dated July 3, 1956 (21 F.R. 5057) (heretofore issued by the Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization) are hereby superseded and revoked.
JOHN F. KENNEDY

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 26, 1963