John F. Kennedy
January 17, 1962

Remarks Upon Signing Orders Relating to Personnel Management in the Federal Service.
YESTERDAY was the 79th anniversary of the enactment of the Civil Service Act, and I am hopeful that the things that we are doing today will also be a source of strength to the entire Federal civil service.
The task force recommendations are being put into effect by these executive orders and I think they have steered a proper course. The public interest remains the dominant consideration, administering Federal employee-management relations, and proper management responsibilities have been retained and strengthened and will be by this executive order.
Within that framework, these orders define and provide a legal base for the rights of Federal employees and employee organizations to participate in improving personnel policies and working conditions not specifically fixed by the Congress.
I want to thank all those who helped in the development of this program, and I am delighted that there are Members of the Congress here who have been concerned about this matter for many years, and also representatives of the employee organizations within the Federal Government. And I want to assure you that it is our aim, as President--and I think it is the aim of all those in positions of responsibility in the Federal Government, as an employer of two million, three hundred thousand civilian employees, to achieve maximum efficiency.
The temporary committee created by the order to implement the program, will indicate the necessary steps to launch this project, and I am confident that the program will result in improved relations between management and employees in the Federal service.
I am also glad to have our visitors from Vienna, Austria, here--the President of the Austrian Trade Union Federation--glad you are taking part in this ceremony.
Note: The President's remarks followed the signing of Executive Order 10987, "Agency Systems for Appeals from Adverse Actions," and Executive Order 10988, "Employee-Management Cooperation in the Federal Service" (27 F.R. 550, 551).
The task force referred to in the second paragraph was established by the President on June 22, 1961, to review and advise on employee-management relations in the Federal service. Its recommendations were submitted on December 5, 1961 (see 1961 volume, this series, p. 769).
In closing, the President referred to Franz Olah, President of the Austrian Trade Union Federation.