John F. Kennedy
January 25, 1963

Letter to the Attorney General Directing Him To Petition for an Injunction in the Boeing Aerospace Labor Dispute.
Dear Mr. Attorney General:
On January 23, 1963, by virtue of the authority vested in me by Section 206 of the Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947 (29 U.S.C. 176), I issued Executive Order No. 11078 creating a Board of Inquiry to inquire into issues involved in labor disputes between the Boeing Company and Rohr Corporation and certain of their employees represented by the following labor organizations:

International Association of Machinists, AFL-CIO;

District Lodge No. 751, International Association of Machinists, AFL-CIO;

District Lodge No. 70, International Association of Machinists, AFL-CIO;

Local Lodge No. 2061, International Association of Machinists, AFL-CIO;

Local Lodge No. 2086, International Association of Machinists, AFL-CIO;

United Automobile, Aerospace and Agriculture Implement Workers of

America, AFL-CIO;

Local Union No. 1069, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agriculture Implement

Workers of America, AFL-CIO;

International Union of United Weldors (Independent);

Local No. 12, International Union of United Weldors
On January 25, 1963, I received the Board's written report in this matter. I understand you have a copy of that report.
These unresolved labor disputes threaten a strike affecting a substantial part of the ballistics missile, space vehicle and military aircraft industry, engaged in trade, commerce, and transportation among the several states, which strike, if permitted to occur or continue, will imperil the national safety.
Therefore, in order to remove a peril to the national safety and to secure a resumption of trade, commerce and transportation among the several states, I direct you, pursuant to the Provisions of Section 208 of the Labor-Management Relations Act, 1947, to petition in the name of the United States any District Court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties to enjoin such strike and for such other relief as may in your judgment be necessary or appropriate.

Sincerely,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
[The Honorable Robert F. Kennedy, The Attorney General]
Note: On September 13, 1962, the President appointed a Board of distinguished citizens to report to him with respect to strikes threatened at several Boeing plants following the expiration of agreements on September 15. On November 6 the White House announced that the parties had agreed to postpone possible strike action until January 15, 1963. (See 1962 volume, this series, Item 376.)
On January 3, 1963, the White House announced that the Board in its report of that date had rebuked the Boeing Company for its attitude of "rigidity" on the union shop issue, and had commended the union for its "sense of responsibility" in being willing to modify its position on the key issue. "We think the nation has a right to expect the Company to show a comparable sense of responsibility," the report stated, "rather than rebuffing all proposals, no matter how moderate and reasonable, which do not conform 100% to the Company's ideas on the subject."
Subsequently a Board of Inquiry under the Taft-Hartley Act was appointed, as related in the President's letter to the Attorney General. The injunction was granted on January 25, and the terms of the various contracts between the parties were agreed to during the course of the injunction, the final agreement being reached on March 24.
The Board of Inquiry's "Final Report to the President" (44 PP., processed) was submitted to him on March 24, 1963-