John F. Kennedy
January 11, 1962

Statement by the President on Receiving Report on Automation by the Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy.
I APPRECIATE greatly the contribution this report represents.
This automation problem is as important as any we face.
We must take advantage of every opportunity for technological development. But we cannot disregard the human values involved.
Your recommendations properly recognize both sides of this problem. I am grateful for your help.
Note: The Committee's first report, dated January 11 and entitled "The Benefits and Problems Incident to Automation and Other Technological Advances" (25 PP., processed), was released with the President's statement. It was presented to the President at the White House by the Chairman, Secretary of Labor Arthur J. Goldberg, and the Vice Chairman, Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges, accompanied by members of the 19-man Committee. (For establishment see 1961 volume, this series, Item 40.)
The Committee's recommendations cover the following matters:
1. Adoption of policies to promote a high rate of economic growth and fuller utilization of resources.
2. Collection and dissemination of information on job opportunities and requirements.
3. Cooperation between Government and private organizations to support and improve educational facilities.
4. Acceptance of responsibility by management for measures to reduce the impact on workers of technological change.
5. Public and private support for retraining of displaced workers, for financial help to such workers in periods of unemployment, and for protection of their job equities and security.
6. Improvement of public employment services.
7. Intensified efforts to end discriminatory employment practices.
8. Advance planning for short-term public works projects in possible areas of technological unemployment.
9. Consideration of possible monetary and fiscal measures, including tax reductions, to stimulate business and employment.
10. Consideration of possible reductions in basic work periods.
Incorporated in the report are dissenting statements by two of the Committee members.