John F. Kennedy
July 24, 1961

Statement by the President on Communication Satellite Policy.
SCIENCE and technology have progressed to such a degree that communication through the use of space satellites has become possible. Through this country's leadership, this competence should be developed for global benefit at the earliest practicable time.
To accomplish this practical objective, increased resources must be devoted to the task and a coordinated national policy should guide the use of those resources in the public interest. Consequently, on May 25, 1961 I asked the Congress for additional funds to accelerate the use of space satellites for worldwide communications. Also, on June 15, I asked the Vice President to have the Space Council make the necessary studies and policy recommendations for the optimum development and operation of such system. This has been done. The primary guideline for the preparation of such recommendations was that public interest objectives be given the highest priority.
I again invite all nations to participate in a communication satellite system, in the interest of world peace and closer brotherhood among peoples throughout the world.
The present status of the communication satellite programs, both civil and military, is that of research and development. To date, no arrangements between the government and private industry contain any commitments as to an operational system.
A. Policy of Ownership and Operation
Private ownership and operation of the U.S. portion of the system is favored, provided that such ownership and operation meet the following policy requirements:
1. New and expanded international communications services be made available at the earliest practicable date;
2. Make the system global in coverage so as to provide efficient communication service throughout the whole world as soon as technically feasible, including service where individual portions of the coverage are not profitable;
3. Provide opportunities for foreign participation through ownership or otherwise, in the communications satellite system;
4. Non-discriminatory use of and equitable access to the system by present and future authorized communications carriers;
5. Effective competition, such as competitive bidding, in the acquisition of equipment used in the system;
6. Structure of ownership or control which will assure maximum possible competition;
7. Full compliance with antitrust legislation and with the regulatory controls of the government;
8. Development of an economical system, the benefits of which will be reflected in overseas communication rates.
B. Policy of Government Responsibility
In addition to its regulatory responsibilities, the U.S. Government will:
1. Conduct and encourage research and development to advance the state of the art and to give maximum assurance of rapid and continuous scientific and technological progress;
2. Conduct or maintain supervision of international agreements and negotiations;
3. Control all launching of U.S. spacecraft;
4. Make use of the commercial system for general governmental purposes and establish separate communications satellite systems when required to meet unique government needs which cannot, in the national interest, be met by the commercial system;
5. Assure the effective use of the radiofrequency spectrum;
6. Assure the ability to discontinue the electronic functioning of satellites when required in the interest of communication efficiency and effectiveness;
7. Provide technical assistance to newly developing countries in order to help attain an effective global system as soon as practicable;
8. Examine with other countries the most constructive role for the United Nations, including the ITU, in international space communications.
C. Coordination
I have asked the full cooperation of all agencies of the government in the vigorous implementation of the policies stated herein. The National Aeronautics and Space Council will provide continuing policy coordination and will also have responsibility for recommending to me any actions needed to achieve full and prompt compliance with the policy. With the guidelines provided here, I am anxious that development of this new technology to bring the farthest corner of the globe within reach by voice and visual communication, fairly and equitably available for use, proceed with all possible promptness.