John F. Kennedy
June 12, 1963

Remarks Commending the Tools for Freedom Program.
I WANT to express a warm welcome to our friends from the Philippines, to the Ambassador, to Mr. Adams, Mr. Sprague, and representatives of the Boston Chamber of Commerce.
I think that this effort to improve the economic development, economic education, technical training of our very old friends, the people of the Philippines, is an effort which I want to endorse strongly.
This represents another substantial contribution to this program, which Mr. Sprague has headed, which has resulted in the giving of tools to, I believe, over 24 schools.
The United States has the greatest backlog of tools of any place in the world. There is a great need for them all around the globe, particularly in the newly developing countries, and I think that if we could put young students together with these tools that it would give them an opportunity to understand how industrialization can materially improve the lives of their people. This is the only way that their lives can be substantially advanced in these communities which have had too long a dependence upon agriculture and one or two agricultural crops.
Now, if we can accomplish in this decade what it really took the West 150 years to develop in the Industrial Revolution, we can make a most significant contribution, and I want to commend the companies involved-the Raytheon Company, and the others-for taking the leadership in this regard, not merely depending upon the National Government to take action in this very vital area but doing it themselves.
So, I commend the business community for this effort.
Note: The President spoke at noon in the Flower Garden at the White House. In his opening remarks he referred to Amelito R. Mutuc, Ambassador to the United States from the Philippines; Charles F. Adams, president, the Raytheon Co.; and Mansfield Sprague, president, Tools for Freedom.
Following the President's remarks Mr. Adams presented to Ambassador Mutuc a plaque representing his company's gift of tools to equip the Magsaysay Memorial School of Arts and Trades in Iba, Zambales. The text of Mr. Adams' remarks and those of the Ambassador was also released.