John F. Kennedy
June 01, 1961

Remarks to the Staff of the U.S. Embassy in Paris
Ambassador Gavin, Mr. Bohlen, Mr. Nitze, members of the Embassy:
I want to express my pleasure at being here this morning. I tried to get assigned to the Embassy in Paris myself, and unable to do so, I decided that I would run for President. But this represents the ultimate. I want to express my appreciation to all of you for the efforts that you are making on behalf of the United States, and also, I believe it quite appropriate to say, on behalf of France and Europe and the Free World. I said last night in my toast that the United States interest in France is not based on mere sentiment. I know it is customary on these visits to recall Lafayette and all the rest. But I also said last night that in the administration after that of General Washington, the United States came close to an open break with France, so swiftly had the sentimental memories of the Revolutionary War disappeared. Our interest here is more substantial, and I believe it goes to the common interests of both the United States and France. We are closely associated and are allies, because it helps protect the interest of our country and because it protects the interests of freedom around the world. I do not believe that there is any Embassy in the world more important to the United States than the Embassy in Paris, because the influence of this city and country goes far beyond its borders. When Mrs. Kennedy and I went to Ottawa 2 weeks ago, we were greeted in the Parliament by a speech by the President of the Senate in French. When the Vice President of the United States was welcomed in Saigon 2 weeks ago, he was welcomed in a speech in French. The long tradition of this country, stretching back to a position of leadership for so many years, gives the representatives of this country a special voice, a special prestige, a special distinction, in their work around the world. France is larger than the total of its parts, and its past, its present, and its future makes your assignment here at this Embassy of the greatest possible importance to our common cause. The security of Europe, its freedom, is essential to the security of the United States, and we plan to take every measure, we plan to continue to devote every energy, to strengthening the common ties which bind us.
You play a great role in that. This country is extremely vital to the success of our common cause, and, therefore, when you speak for the United States here, and when the French people who comprehend under their distinguished leader the long movement of history, I believe you have a unique opportunity to be of service.
I want to express my special appreciation to those of you who are of French extraction. I do not believe it inopportune to say that in serving the United States in this Embassy, I hope that you feel also that you are serving France.
So, ladies and gentlemen, we are indebted to you. This is an important post. You serve our country, and I know together that we will continue to press forward for the causes in which we believe.
Thank you.
NOTE: The President's opening words referred to James M. Gavin, American Ambassador to France, Charles E. Bohlen, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, and Paul H. Nitze. Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.