John F. Kennedy
June 15, 1962

Joint Statement following Discussions With Deputy Prime Minister Marshall of New Zealand.
THE Deputy Prime Minister reviewed his recent discussions in England and on the Continent relative to the possible entry of the United Kingdom into the European Common Market. The Deputy Prime Minister emphasized New Zealand's dependence on the United Kingdom market for her export trade which is primarily based on temperate agricultural products. He mentioned the assurances he had received in the United Kingdom that New Zealand's position would be a matter of special concern to the British Government in considering arrangements for possible entry into the European Common Market. Mr. Marshall explained why New Zealand wished to see Commonwealth preferences retained; he emphasized, however, that for New Zealand, the issue of paramount importance was market outlets for its products in the United Kingdom, or in an enlarged European Community, comparable to what it now enjoyed, with the opportunity for growth as the market expanded.
The President and the Deputy Prime Minister agreed upon the desirability of European unity as well as the importance of liberalizing world trade. The President described the trade expansion legislation now pending before the United States Congress, explaining that with the passage of this legislation he expected a general expansion of trade among the nations of the free world. The special problems of New Zealand trade were recognized with understanding. The President and Mr. Marshall agreed that regular consultations between their two countries on matters of trade should continue.
Also participating in the discussions in Washington were for New Zealand, Ambassador G. R. Laking and Mr. Foss Shanahan, Deputy Secretary, Department of External Affairs, and for the United States, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Commerce Luther Hodges, Under Secretary of State George Ball and Assistant of Agriculture Charles Murphy, Under Secretary of State W. Averell Harriman.