John F. Kennedy
June 12, 1961

Proclamation 3418—Display of the Flag at the United States Marine Corps Memorial in Arlington, Virginia

Whereasthe joint resolution of Congress of June 22, 1942, entitled "Joint Resolution To Codify and Emphasize Existing Rules and Customs Pertaining to the Display and Use of the Flag of the United States of America," as amended by the joint resolution of December 22, 1942, 56 Stat. 1074, contains the following provisions:
"SEC. 2. (a) It is the universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to sunset on buildings and on stationary flagstaffs in the open. However, the flag may be displayed at night upon special occasions when it is desired to produce a patriotic effect.
* * * * *
"SEC. 8. Any rule or custom pertaining to the display of the flag of the United States of America, set forth herein, may be altered, modified, or repealed, or additional rules with respect thereto may be prescribed, by the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, whenever he deems it to be appropriate or desirable; and any such alteration or additional rule shall be set forth in a proclamation."; and
Whereasthe battle between the United States forces and the forces of the Japanese for possession of the island of Iwo Jima, in the North Pacific, was one of the most significant and most costly battles of World War II; and
Whereasvictory in that battle was achieved by our forces after a heroic and prolonged struggle; and
Whereasthe raising of the American flag during that battle over Mt. Suribachi on February 23, 1945, symbolizes the courage and valor of the American fighting forces in World War II; and
Whereasthe United States Marine Corps Memorial in Arlington, Virginia, portrays the actual raising of the American flag on Mt. Suribachi:
Now, Therefore, I, John F. Kennedy,President of the United States of America, to hereby proclaim that the flag of the United States of America shall hereafter be displayed at the United States Marine Corps Memorial in Arlington, Virginia, at all times during the day and night, except when the weather is inclement.
The rules and customs pertaining to the display of the flag as set forth in the joint resolution of June 22, 1942, are hereby modified accordingly.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this twelfth day of June in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-fifth.


JOHN F. KENNEDY
By the President:

DEAN RUSK,

Secretary of State