John F. Kennedy
March 21, 1962

Joint Statement following Discussions With President Olympio of Togo.
THE PRESIDENT of the Republic of Togo, His Excellency Sylvanus Olympio, who is making a five-day visit to the United States as a Presidential guest of President Kennedy, will conclude a two-day stay in Washington tomorrow and continue his visit in New York. This visit has afforded an opportunity for the two Presidents to establish a personal acquaintance and discuss fully matters of common concern, including .problems of global interest affecting world peace and human welfare.
The two Chiefs of State agreed that the formation of the Organization of African States at the recent Lagos Conference was a constructive step toward building African unity through political consultation and practical cooperation in the various technical and economic fields. President Olympio pointed out that such a regional organization should be based on the same principles as those of the United Nations, including the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of member states.
President Olympio expressed his deep satisfaction for the unwavering support which the United States has given to the United Nations, particularly since the newly independent states consider that Organization a guarantee of their independence.
The two Presidents reviewed the friendly and mutually beneficial relations already established between the two countries. President Kennedy noted the determined efforts toward economic and social development being carried forward by the Republic of Togo and stated the desire of the United States to continue development assistance to Togo. President Kennedy also expressed satisfaction that the United States could make available surplus commodities to alleviate the severe famine conditions in northern Togo, and President Olympio thanked him for this help. In addition the two Presidents discussed the role which the "food for Peace" program could play in stimulating economic and social development in Togo.