John F. Kennedy
March 18, 1963

Letter to the Executive Director, American Association for the United Nations.
[ Released March 18, 1963. Dated March 7, 1963 ]
Dear Mr. Eichelberger:
Please extend my greetings and good wishes to each of the delegates to the Thirteenth Annual Conference of National Organizations and to the organizations they represent, including the American Association for the United Nations which is sponsoring this important meeting.
It is good that you are getting a progress report on the first year of the United Nation's Decade of Development. Few activities can equal in importance those which are related to helping men and women around the world to acquire the skills and organizations--of government and of business-which are needed not only to improve the standards of living but also to lift up the quality of life. It is the well-established policy of our government to aid such efforts, through the United Nations and through other appropriate channels.
I note that the American Association for the United Nations is now celebrating its fortieth anniversary of work in behalf of organizations standing for hope, and decency, and the rule of law in the affairs of nations: at first the League of Nations and now the United Nations. But the fact that there is now wide public acceptance and support of the United Nations does not mean that your jobs of education and of provoking discussion are finished. Many unresolved problems still face the United Nations. One of the thorniest is that of financial responsibility; another is that of maintaining a truly international civil service.
Finally, may I join you in your tribute to Eleanor Roosevelt? Time will not tarnish the luster of her legacy to us, nor will future generations forget her tireless work and selfless devotion to the highest concept of human rights. May the memory of her life continue to bring inspiration to men and women in every land.

Sincerely,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
[Mr. Clark M. Eichelberger, Executive Director, American Association for the United Nations, 345 East 46th Street, New York 17, New York]
Note: The letter was released at Palm Beach, Fla.