John F. Kennedy
May 02, 1961

Statement by the President Announcing a Program of Assistance to the Textile Industry.
THE PROBLEMS of the textile industry are serious and deep-rooted. They have been the subject of investigation at least as far back as 1935, when a Cabinet committee was appointed by President Roosevelt to investigate the conditions in this industry. Most recently these problems were the subject of a special study by the Interdepartmental Committee headed by Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges. I believe it is time for action.
It is our second largest employer. Some 2 million workers are directly affected by conditions in the industry. There are another 2 million persons employed in furnishing requirements of the industry at its present level of production. Two years ago, the Office of Defense Mobilization testified that it was one of the industries essential to our National security. It is of vital importance in peacetime and it has a direct effect upon our total economy. All the studies have shown that unemployment in textile mills strikes hardest at those communities suffering most from depressed conditions.
I propose to initiate the following measures:
First, I have directed the Department of Commerce to launch an expanded program of research, covering new products, processes and markets. This should be done in cooperation with both union and management groups.
Second, I have asked the Treasury Department to review existing depreciation allowances on textile machinery. Revision of these allowances, together with adoption of the investment incentive credit proposals contained in my message to the Congress of April 20, 1961, should assist in the modernization of the industry.
Third, I have directed the Small Business Administration to assist the cotton textile industry to obtain the necessary financing for modernization of its equipment.
Fourth, I have directed the Department of Agriculture to explore and make recommendations to eliminate or offset the cost to United States mills of the adverse differential in raw cotton costs between domestic and foreign textile producers.
Filth, I will shortly send to the Congress a proposal to permit industries seriously injured or threatened with serious injury as a result of increased imports to be eligible for assistance from the Federal Government.
Sixth, I have directed the Department of State to arrange for calling an early conference of the principal textile exporting and importing countries. This conference will seek an international understanding which will provide a basis for trade that will avoid undue disruption of established industries.
Seventh, In addition to this program, an application by the textile industry for action under existing statutes, such as the escape clause or the national security. provision of the Trade Agreements Extension Act, will be carefully considered on its merits.
I believe this program will assist our textile industry to meet its basic problems, while at the same time recognizing the national interest in expansion of world trade and the successful development of less developed nations. It takes into account the dispersion of the industry, the range of its products, and its highly competitive character. It is my hope that these measures will strengthen the industry and expand consumption of its products without disrupting international trade and without disruption of the markets of any country.
Note: On October 11 the White House announced that the Treasury Department had completed its review of existing depreciation allowances on textile machinery and that a new depreciation schedule had been adopted. The release stated that the estimated average useful life for most textile machinery and equipment had been reduced from 25 years or longer to 15 years and in some cases to 12 years. The release added that the resulting speeding up of depreciation deductions, reflecting current technological conditions, would be of significant help to the industry in enabling it to modernize, meet foreign competition, and provide jobs.
The release further stated that a study of depreciation allowances with respect to all industries was under way, but that, in accordance with the President's directive, the study with respect to the textile industry had been accelerated.
See also Item 428.