John F. Kennedy
May 19, 1961

Executive Order 10944—Creating an Emergency Board to Investigate a Dispute Between the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company and Other Carriers and Certain of Their Employees
WHEREAS a dispute exists between the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company and other carriers represented by the Eastern, Western, and Southeastern Carriers' Conference Committees, designated in List A attached hereto and hereby made a part hereof, and certain of their employees represented by the Railroad Yardmasters of America, a labor organization; and
WHEREAS this dispute has not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act as amended; and
WHEREAS this dispute, in the judgment of the National Mediation Board, threatens substantially to interrupt interstate commerce to a degree such as to deprive a section of the country of essential transportation service:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 10 of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 160), I hereby create a board of three members, to be appointed by me, to investigate this dispute. No member of the board shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railroad employees or any carrier. The board shall report its findings to the President with respect to the dispute within thirty days from the date of this order.
As provided by section 10 of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, from this date and for thirty days after the board has made its report to the President, no change, except by agreement, shall be made by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company and other carriers represented by the Eastern, Western, and Southeastern Carriers' Conference Committees, or by their employees, in the conditions out of which the dispute arose.
JOHN F. KENNEDY

THE WHITE HOUSE,

May 19, 1961
LIST A
EASTERN RAILROADS
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company

Baltimore and Ohio-Chicago Terminal

Staten Ialand Rapid Transit

Boston and Maine Railroad

Boston Terminal

Buffalo Creek Railway

Cleveland Union Terminals

Chicago River & Indiana Railroad

Delaware & Hudson Railroad Corporation

Delaware, Lackawanna & Western Railroad Company

Detroit Terminal Railroad Company

Erie Railroad

Grand Trunk Western Railroad Company

Lehigh & New England Railroad Company

Lehigh Valley Railway Company

Long Island Railroad Company

Monon Railroad

New York, Chicago & St. Louis Railway

Pennsylvania Railroad Company

Pittsburgh & Lake Erie Railroad Company

Pittsburgh & West Virginia Railroad

Pittsburgh, Chartiers & Youghiogheny Railway Company

Washington Terminal Company
WESTERN RAILROADS
Alton and Southern Railroad

Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway

Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway

Panhandle and Santa Fe Railway

Chicago and North Western Railway, (including former C.St. PM&O, but excluding former L&M)

Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad

Chicago, Great Western Railway (including South St. Paul Terminal)

Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad

Chicago Produce Terminal Company

Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Ralroad

Davenport, Rock Island and North Western Railway

Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad

Des Moines Union Rallway

Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railroad

Fort Worth and Denver Railway

Great Northern Railway

Houston Belt & Terminal Railway

Illlnois Northern Railway

Kansas City Southern Railway

Louisiana & Arkansas Railway

Minneapolis & St. Louis Railway

Railway Transfer Company of the City of Minneapolis

Minneapolis, St. Paul and Sault Ste. Marie Railroad

Minnesota Transfer Railway

Missouri Paclfic Railroad

Northern Pacific Railway (including King Street Passenger Station)

Ogden Union Railway and Depot Company

Peoria and Pekin Union Railway

Port Terminal Railroad Association

St. Louis-San Francisco Railway

St. Louis, San Francisco and Texas Railway

St. Paul Union Depot Company

Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway

Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis

Texas and Pacific Railway

Fort Worth Belt Railway

Texas Pacific-Missouri Pacific Terminal Railroad of New Orleans

Union Pacific Railroad

Union Railway Company (Memphis)

Union Terminal Company (Dallas)

Wabash Railroad

Western Pacific Railroad

SOUTHEASTERN RAILROADS
Western Railway of Alabama

Clinchfield Railroad

Florida East Coast Railroad

Gulf, Mobile & Ohio Railroad

Jacksonville Terminal Company

Kentucky & Indiana Terminal Railroad

Louisville & Nashville Railroad

Norfolk & Western Railway

Southern Railway

Cinncinnati, New Orleans & Texas Pacific Railway

Alabama Great Southern Railway

New Orleans & Northeastern Railroad

New Orleans Terminal Company

Georgia Southern & Florida Railway