John F. Kennedy
May 16, 1961

Remarks Upon Arrival at the Royal Canadian Air Force Uplands Airport in Ottawa.
Your Excellency Governor General, Madame Vanier, Prime Minister, Mrs. Diefenbaker, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to express the heartfelt thanks of my wife and myself for your generous welcome today. This easy voyage of less than 2 hours, from Washington to this capital, this great country, indicates I think more than anything the cordial and intimate relations which exist between Canada and the United States.
I am somewhat encouraged in saying a few words in French, from having had a chance to listen to the Prime Minister. [Prolonged laughter] It's an unfortunate division of labor, that my wife who speaks so well should sit there without saying a word, while I get up and talk.
Ce voyage est le premier que je fais hors des Etats-Unis depuis mon election e la Presidence de mon pays et il est juste que c'est au Canada, le plus ancien de nos voisins et l'un de nos amis les plus chers.1
1The following translation appears in the White House release of this address:
This is my first trip away from the United States since I succeeded to the Presidency. It is fitting that I should come here to Canada, the oldest of our neighbors and among the closest of our friends.
I do want to say that I am here to repay the visit which your distinguished Prime Minister made to the United States, the first visit which I received as a new President. And I must say that his counsel and friendship were of great value to us all in the early days of a new administration.
The tide of foreign affairs flows swiftly in and out. New nations arise, old empires vanish, alliances come and go, but through it all the historic friendship of your nation and mine has stood firm. Together we have worked for peace, together we have stood in war, and now in this long twilight era that is neither peace nor war, we must stand together even more firmly than ever before.
In the effort to build a continent of economic growth and solidarity, in the effort to build a hemisphere of freedom and hope, in the effort to build an Atlantic community of strength and unity of purpose, and in the effort to build a world of lasting peace and
justice, Canada and the United States, the Red Ensign and Old Glory, must be found, and I am certain will be found, standing where we have always stood--together.
I am delighted to be here today. Back in 1812 one of our distinguished speakers, John Randolph, attacked the Members of the Congress for saying one word only, Canada, Canada, Canada. I think at different times many of us in Canada and the United States, conscious of the problems that we face, of the differences which may exist between us, have indulged ourselves in the luxury of criticizing the shortcomings of each other, forgetting how important it is that a strong and intimate understanding should exist between the United States and Canada, sharing as we do a great continent bound together by history and by geography.
The generous trip of your Prime Minister I think reminded many of my fellow Americans of how important that relationship is. This trip which I take I hope will remind the people of my own country and of Canada of how essential it is in the coming days--and many of them will be difficult-that this friendship should continue.
Therefore, Mr. Prime Minister--therefore Governor General--therefore all your countrymen-we are proud and honored to be with you today.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 4:56 p.m. In his opening words he referred to Governor General George P. Vanier and Madame Vanier, and Prime Minister John G. Diefenbaker and Mrs. Diefenbaker.