John F. Kennedy
May 20, 1961

Letters to the Secretary of State and to the Secretary of the Interior Concerning the Passamaquoddy Tidal Power Project.
To the Secretary of State: My dear Mr. Secretary:
I am informed that you have requested the comments of interested Federal agencies on the report of the International Joint Commission, United States and Canada, on the Passamaquoddy Tidal Power Project.
This project has challenged engineers and students of water resources for many years, and I am hopeful that the current report and related studies can be as useful as possible in formulating a sound policy for the development of resources in the area covered by the report. I have, therefore, asked the Secretary of the Interior to advise me on the power and natural resource aspects of the report. A copy of my request to Secretary Udall is enclosed for your information.
I wish you would give particular attention to his views on these matters prior to submitting your report to the Bureau of the Budget for clearance.

Sincerely,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
To the Secretary of the Interior: My dear Mr. Secretary:
As you know, the International Joint Commission, United States and Canada, has submitted its report on the International Passamaquoddy Tidal Power Project to the Governments of the United States and Canada. I am informed that the report has now been circulated by the Secretary of State to the interested Federal agencies, including the Department of the Interior, for comment.
This project has challenged engineers and students of water resources for many years, and I am hopeful that the current report and the related studies of the International Passamaquoddy Engineering Board and the New England-New York Inter-agency Committee can be as useful as possible in formulating a sound policy for the development of resources in the area covered by the report. I would, therefore, appreciate it if, following your review and evaluation of the report, you would advise me of your judgment about what changes in fuel, engineering and financing costs might result in making the project economically feasible. I would also appreciate your advice on the advisability of hydroelectric power development on the upper St. John River at this time and on any other relevant matters relating to the report.
I have notified the Secretary of State of my request for your advice on this project and have asked that he give particular attention to your views on these matters in his report on the project.

Sincerely,
JOHN F. KENNEDY