John F. Kennedy
October 19, 1962

Remarks in Chicago to Democratic Precinct Workers.
Ladies and gentlemen:
I'm not sure this trio is quite as good as the one you just heard, but we'll do our best! Maybe if you could just put out that spot here [indicating] so I can see what 3,000 precinct committeemen look like--I just want to see who did it last November 1960, and here they are. They said terrible things about you, but I never believed it. I hope that you will do the same for Congressman Sid Yates, who's an old colleague of mine, who has my unqualified support, and I know has yours, and I know will have that of the people of Illinois next November 6th, so let's elect him.
I understand Mayor Daley plans to keep you locked up here until November 6th and then turn you loose. Well, all of us who hold office are the beneficiaries of your effort, and I'm sure that you feel that your effort is rewarded in this party of which we are members. I must say that it's a source of pride to me to be a Democrat. We are members of the oldest political party in the world. We trace our inheritance back to Thomas Jefferson, and Jackson, and Cleveland, and Wilson, and Roosevelt, and Truman, and I must say I contrast that inheritance to McKinley, to Taft, to Dewey, to Harding, and a few other candidates I could name.
So, ladies and gentlemen, we're doing the best we can to demonstrate that your confidence 2 years ago was not in vain. We'll continue to do the best we can. I must say I think we can meet the responsibilities that face us here at home much, much better if you just pick yourselves up next November 6th and elect a Democratic ticket from top to bottom, starting with Sid Yates and all those Congressmen who are nominated here.
Artemas Ward, who was a citizen of my State, once said, "I'm not a politician, and my other habits are good also." Well, we are politicians in the best sense of the word, and we're going to prove it November 6th.

Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at McCormick Place in Chicago, Ill. During his remarks he referred to U.S. Representative Sidney R. Yates, Democratic candidate for U.S. Senator from Illinois, and to Mayor Richard J. Daley of Chicago.