John F. Kennedy
October 08, 1963

Remarks to a Group of Agricultural Leaders From Latin America.
I JUST want to express a very warm welcome to all of you here at the White House and an even warmer welcome to the United States. And I compliment the Farmers Union for the work they have done in attempting to explain how our agricultural life is organized and attempting to work with you in determining those things about our experience which can be useful to you.
It seems to me the important principle which I am sure you have learned, which this country has learned, which other countries, I think, are beginning to learn, is that agriculture cannot be controlled successfully or dominated by the national government. It requires very dedicated work by the individual on the farm and it requires extensive cooperative and community work.
Whatever you can find of our experience in the organizations of young people--4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America--the very intimate relationship between our farms and our universities, the organizations that we have set up to transmit knowledge quickly among the farmers so that they can be the most advanced, we hope, in the world, I hope some of these experiences will be useful to you.
The solution of the problem of agriculture in this hemisphere I would regard as a key. There is no reason why, with all of the tremendous advances and information and knowledge--there is no reason really why any of our people should be hungry or that they should live on an inadequate diet.
I can't think of a group with your experience and the motivation which you have brought here that can go back and serve your people and your countries with more distinction and more credit and more advantage.
So we have the greatest hopes for your work as fellow citizens of this hemisphere.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at noon in the Flower Garden at the White House. The group of 59 farm leaders from 4 Latin American countries had studied U.S. agriculture and farm organizations for 6 months under a program conducted by the National Farmers Union for the Agency for International Development as part of the Alliance for Progress. The trainees had spent 4 1/2 months with American farm families in Iowa, Minnesota, Montana, the Dakotas, and Wisconsin.