John F. Kennedy
October 17, 1962

Remarks on the New Haven Green.
Governor Dempsey; Mayor Lee; Abe Ribicoff; Bernie Grabowski--who's going to be the next Congressman at Large from the State of Connecticut; the distinguished Congressman from this district whom I know you're going to reelect, Bob Giaimo--who I know is going to have another term to serve this State, to serve this country; members of the State ticket; ladies and gentlemen:
I have come to this center of learning in order to come back to my college--Yale-and I have enjoyed that warm reception I've gotten from my fellow Elis as I drove into this city--[laughter]--but they will learn, as this country has learned, that the Democratic Party is best for them as it is for the country.
Now, why do we say that? Why do we say that? Well, I'll tell you. I'll tell you what this administration has done in the last 22 months which I think makes a difference in the life of everyone in the State of Connecticut. When we assumed responsibility for office in January 1961, unemployment in the State of Connecticut was over 8 percent. That unemployment today in the State of Connecticut is down to 4 percent and I believe should go lower.
This administration in the last 21 months--the average corporate profit in the United States, which may be of particular interest to some, has gone up 23 percent in the last 22 months. Personal savings have gone up 12 percent. The gross national product has gone up over 11 percent. Farm income is the highest it's been in 10 years.
That is the record of this administration on which we run in October 1962. This country will spend more on its space program this year than all the 8 years from 1953 to 1960. This administration and Congress have strengthened the military forces of the United States, have increased the combat divisions of the Army by five, the number of Polaris submarines by 50 percent, the number of bombers on the 15-minute alert by 50 percent, and have given the United States the strongest peacetime posture it has ever had, in the last 21 months.
This administration and this Congress have passed the most comprehensive Housing Act for the elderly since 1949, have increased the minimum wage to $1.25 an hour, have lowered social security retirement from 65 to 62, have given aid to dependent children, have passed the most comprehensive Trade Expansion Act in the history of this country, and that's why we're here tonight to ask your help.
Now, while we were doing this, what is the record of the Republicans? On a bill to provide medical care for the aged under a system of social security, seven-eighths of the Republicans voted against it, and a change of 1 vote would have meant its passage. On a bill to provide a minimum wage of $1.25 an hour, that's $50 a week, 89 percent of the Republicans voted against it-$1.25 an hour, $50 a week--just as 90 percent of the Republicans in the thirties voted against 25 cents an hour. That's why I'm a Democrat.
On a bill to permit the cities of the United States, where 75 percent of our people live, to have representation at the Cabinet table, 90 percent of the Republicans voted against it. They are against anything new because it's new, anything good because it's progressive, and that's why we're here tonight to ask your support for the Democratic Party.
On a bill to provide assistance to areas of this country which have chronic unemployment--1, 2, or 3 years, people out of work--15 or 20 percent--on a bill to provide area redevelopment, 82 percent of the Republicans voted against it. That's why we're Democrats, and that's why this State is going to elect Governor Dempsey in November. That's why this State is going to send Abe Ribicoff to the United States Senate in November. That's why this district is going to elect Bob Giaimo for another term, and they're going to elect a Congressman at Large who can serve Connecticut and this country in Bernie Grabowski.
That's what is going to happen on November 6th, and when they do that, on all these programs which make it possible for this country to maintain its economic vitality instead of limping from recession to recession, in 1958 and 1960, we're going to do the job. So I come here tonight and ask the voters of New Haven, the voters of Connecticut, the voters of the United States, to support the Democratic Party in the House, in the Senate, and in the Governors' mansions November 6th.
Ladies and gentlemen, this election in its own way is just as important, as it decides the makeup of the House and the Senate, just as important as a presidential election. Under the Constitution, the powers given to the Members of the House and Senate to write the laws, to determine the fiscal policy of the United States, are almost complete. The power of the President in domestic affairs is confined to executing the laws. He also has a responsibility, however, to recommend a program, and I recommend in 1962 a program of progress for this country, and I hope we'll have a Democratic House and Senate that is so committed. And that's what we're meeting for tonight, and that's why we're going to be successful.

Thank you.
Note: In his opening words the President referred to John N. Dempsey, Governor of Connecticut; Richard C. Lee, Mayor of New Haven; Abraham A. Ribicoff, Democratic candidate for U.S. Senator from Connecticut; Bernard F. Grabowski, Democratic candidate for U.S. Representative at Large from Connecticut; and Robert N. Giaimo, U.S. Representative from Connecticut.