John F. Kennedy
October 25, 1963

Statement by the President on Radio Free Europe.
RADIO Free Europe is one of the most important channels of communication between the rest of the world and Eastern Europe. It provides the peoples of these countries with the kind of complete national radio service they would have if they were free to make their own choice.
The free world is entirely open to Communist propaganda and argumentation and we have no fear of engaging in a battle of ideas. But the Communist world is largely closed to information and to Western thought and receives a one-sided view not only of ideological matters but even of factual developments throughout the world. Radio Free Europe attempts to redress this imbalance.
In large part, RFE has been successful because of the energy, skill, and dedication of the hundreds of men and women who work tirelessly to prepare timely and accurate broadcasts day after day, year after year. To these people the support they receive each year from the many American individuals and corporations who contribute to the RFE Fund is crucial. This support symbolizes the moral commitment of the American people to see self-determination in the half of Europe which is still denied that right.
There are few areas where the need for greater freedom is more evident than in Eastern Europe. The recent history of the area demonstrates how highly these brave people value freedom. The United States Government welcomes all adjustments which make the governments of these countries more responsive to the will of their peoples. We intend, by all the peaceful means available to us, to support the greater extension of freedom in this entire area.
I urge my fellow citizens to contribute generously to the Radio Free Europe Fund this year to help insure that RFE's valuable work continues.
Note: The statement was released following a luncheon in the State Dining Room at the White House for a group of 64 corporate executives from throughout the United States, supporters of Radio Free Europe.