John F. Kennedy
October 07, 1963

Remarks at the Signing of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
Ladies and gentlemen:
In its first two decades the age of nuclear energy has been full of fear, yet never empty of hope. Today the fear is a little less and the hope a little greater. For the first time we have been able to reach an agreement which can limit the dangers of this age.
The agreement itself is limited, but its message of hope has been heard and understood not only by the peoples of the three originating nations, but by the peoples and governments of the hundred other countries that have signed. This treaty is the first fruit of labor in which multitudes have shared--citizens, legislators, statesmen, diplomats, and soldiers, too.
Soberly and unremittingly this Nation-but never this Nation alone-- has sought the doorway to effective disarmament into a world where peace is secure. Today we have a beginning and it is right for us to acknowledge all whose work across the years has helped make this beginning possible.
What the future will bring, no one of us can know. This first fruit of hope may or may not be followed by larger harvests. Even this limited treaty, great as it is with promise, can survive only if it has from others the determined support in letter and in spirit which I hereby pledge in behalf of the United States.
If this treaty fails, it will not be our doing, and even if it fails, we shall not regret that we have made this clear and honorable national commitment to the cause of man's survival. For under this treaty we can and must still keep our vigil in defense of freedom.
But this treaty need not fail. This small step toward safety can be followed by others longer and less limited, if also harder in the taking. With our courage and understanding enlarged by this achievement, let us press onward in quest of man's essential desire for peace.
As President of the United States and with the advice and consent of the Senate, I now sign the instruments of ratification of this treaty.
Note: The President spoke in the Treaty Room at the White House.
The treaty entered into force on October 10, 1963, and was proclaimed by the President on the same day. The text of the treaty is printed in Item 314.