John F. Kennedy
September 25, 1963

Remarks Upon Arrival at the Airport in Cheyenne.
Gale McGee, Mr. Mayor, Secretary Udall, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to express my thanks to you for a warm welcome. When I asked them, when we were flying, what the weather was, they said 70 degrees, visibility 90 miles. Well, that is why I left Washington, because the weather is somewhat different and the visibility is much less. You see not only further here, but there is something more to see, and I am glad to come all the way from Washington to this community and this State because it is a welcome reminder to fly across the United States and see what a great, rich, prosperous, ever-growing country this is.
And here in this State of Wyoming some of the results of that economic growth have been felt in recent years. This State of Wyoming, which has all the troubles that all of us have across the country, nevertheless has grown in individual income so that it is now in percentage of growth in the top five States in the United States. This is due to many reasons--the work of the people here, the resources which you have and, I hope, wise national policy on conservation, and resource development, and management of what nature has given us and management of what man has developed from nature.

The fact of the matter is that conservation, which is the primary purpose of our trip across America, has changed. Before, it was just preserving what the Lord gave us. Now it is using science and technology to find new uses for materials which, a few short years ago, were wasted.
So I come from Washington, D.C., to this community, and I want to tell you that I believe that the strength and influence which our country has, the burdens which it bears around the world, are in good measure due to the strength and determination and perseverance and hope of the people in this State and the other 49. I appreciate being welcomed here, and I know in holding out a hand of greeting you carry on a great tradition of this State. This State was once represented by a Massachusetts man who was smart--Senator O'Mahoney--who came all the way from Chelsea, Massachusetts, and came and represented this State. How many people here today were born in Wyoming? Would you hold up your hands? And how many people were not born in Wyoming?
Well, for one reason or another we all came here, and I am glad.

Thank you very much.
Note: In his opening words the President referred to Gale McGee, U.S. Senator from Wyoming; Bill Nation, Mayor of Cheyenne: and Stewart L. Udall, Secretary of the Interior. He later referred to Joseph C. O'Mahoney, former U.S. Senator from Wyoming.