John F. Kennedy
September 27, 1963

Remarks in Salt Lake City at the Dedication by Remote Control of Flaming Gorge Dam.
Senator Moss, Secretary Udall, Senator Magnuson from Washington, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to express my gratification at being able to participate in this ceremony, which has such significance to the people of this State.
As I move through the West, especially in this State and other States where water is short, I realize that nearly all of the standard of living which we enjoy in this part of the United States has been due partly to our own efforts, the generation which is now here, but really even more to the generation that went before--the people who started in the early 1920's, for example, to organize the distribution of water along the basin; the people who began to talk many years ago about what we are now putting into practice. So I think it is essential that we, in the 1960's, take steps to provide for the kind of country and State that we are going to have 20 years from now, so that we do for our children the same thing that was done for us.
In this State, this section of the United States, of course, the key is water. And unless we organize every drop to be of service to mankind, this State is going to stand still. You can't possibly grow once the water level remains the same. Once the amount of water you have available for irrigation and reclamation and power remains the same, this State stands still. So water is the key-the management of water, I think, is the key that will open a very bright future. You may only perceive it very slightly in the next few years, but those who come after you-they will know it, and they will remember it with appreciation.
I am particularly glad because Senator Moss has preached the doctrine of the wise use of water with, I think, more vigor, almost, than any Member of the United States Senate. He is chairman of the Subcommittee on Irrigation and Reclamation. He learned this lesson the hard way, as anyone must who lives here. I come from a section of the country where we waste water, where we seek ways to get rid of it, where we seek to have it flow to the ocean as quickly as possible. It is just the reverse here. And, therefore, those of us who come from a section where water is in surplus, I think it is valuable for us to come and feel that hot sun, and fly over this country and see only on occasion where there are water resources, and then realize how important this project is.
But the important thing to remember is, for 50 years men have been talking about this project. It is now a reality. What are we going to do now so that 50 years from now the people who live in Utah and the United States will feel that in the early sixties we made the proper decision for the management of our resources?
So this is going to make a profound difference to this State. It stands in the finest tradition of Federal-State cooperation and public and private coordination. This is going to be a tremendous lake, which will be a great recreational attraction which will bring people from all over the State and all over this part of the West. But it is not limited to its power, storage, or recreational use. We must depend upon this kind of action for growth. This great dam, with almost 4 million acre feet of capacity, will make Salt Lake City grow, even though we are 150 miles from this dam which we now touch.
It was 116 years ago when Brigham Young introduced irrigation to the United States. I am glad that we are following in that great tradition this morning and, therefore, I will now take action which will start the first generator at Flaming Gorge Dam.

Do you want to stand up here, Senator? I never know when I press these whether it means we are going to blow up Massachusetts, or light a fire or electricity, but I am going on the assumption that we are going to start the generator. [Laughter]
Voice of announcer: When the President pushes the buzzer, we will wait then to hear from Mr. Walton over the loudspeaker who will report on what the generator does; and thus you will know, Mr. President, whether you blew it up or not.

THE PRESIDENT, If we don't hear from them, it's back to the drawing board and we'll start again! Here we go [presses buzzer].
Voice of J. R. Walton, project construction engineer [after a very long pause]: Mr. President, the generator is now running at full speed !
Voice of announcer: Now you can sum up anything you want to say, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT. This gives you an idea of how difficult the life of a President is. We do this all day.

Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at the Municipal Airport in Salt Lake City before leaving for Tacoma, Wash. In his opening words he referred to Frank E. Moss, U.S. Senator from Utah; Stewart L. Udall, Secretary of the Interior; Warren G. Magnuson, U.S. Senator from Washington; and William I. Palmet, Assistant Commissioner of Reclamation.
Flaming Gorge Dam is on the Green River in the Colorado Basin 150 miles east of Salt Lake City.