John F. Kennedy
September 07, 1963

Telephone Remarks to Admiral Reedy and Other Survivors of the Patrol Bomber Squadron in Which the President's Brother Served.
HELLO, Admiral, I want to express all of our thanks to you and to send our very best wishes to all those who served in the "110." I know its record very well. And I know from the letters which my family received during the Second World War how much my brother valued his association with this distinguished squadron which had an outstanding record in the winter, spring, and the summer patrolling the Bay of Biscay.
I know something about the number of men who were lost in that difficult and dangerous service with the Coastal Command, and I take the greatest pride and satisfaction in extending our very best wishes to all of them.
The war is now 20 years past, but I think that they can all take the strongest pride in having served their country during difficult and dangerous days in a service which required the utmost in skill and courage, and I know that all of you, Admiral, who are meeting now have happy recollections of those who served in the squadron who did not return.
I think it is appropriate as we look to the future of our country that we also recall those who served it in times past. So I wish you would extend to all who were there my very best greetings. I share with them a satisfaction in what they did for the United States. It sets an example for all those who came after, and I know that my brother and all those others who served with the squadron who are not with you are with you tonight in spirit.

Thank you very much, Admiral.
Note: The President spoke by telephone from Hyanhis Port where he was attending a family celebration of the 75th birthday of his father. Rear Admiral James R. Reedy was in the Willard Hotel in Washington with about 70 men who had served with him in Patrol Bomber Squadron 110, of which he was the first commanding officer. The President's older brother, Lt. Joseph P. Kennedy, Jr., a member of the squadron, was killed in August 1944 when his plane exploded over England on a bombing mission. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and Senator Edward M. Kennedy also spoke briefly by telephone to the group assembled in the Willard Hotel.