John F. Kennedy
September 16, 1963

Remarks at the Swearing In of Representatives and Alternates to the 18th U.N. General Assembly.
Mr. Secretary, Governor Stevenson:
It is a great pleasure to participate once 'again in this inauguration of the new delegation. This is an unusually distinguished group of Americans, Governor, who are going with you to carry out an assignment which is second to none in the field of foreign policy, in the field of national security. I look forward to being with them on Friday.
I think that this country has based great hopes in the United Nations since 1945. This has been particularly true since Governor Stevenson has led our delegation, and I am confident that this year, as in the past, we will break new ground in the effort to provide for a more peaceful world.
So we are glad to welcome them all here and to express appreciation to Members of Congress who are serving and to the other American citizens who are participating in this national effort.
Note: The President spoke at noon in the Cabinet Room at the White House. His opening words referred to Harlan Cleveland, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, who represented Secretary Rusk in the latter's absence, and to Adlai E. Stevenson, U.S. Representative to the United Nations and Representative in the Security Council, and former Governor of Illinois.
On September 6 a White House release announced that the President had nominated the following persons, in addition to Ambassador Stevenson, to be representatives and alternates of the U.S. Delegation to the 18th session of the U.N. General Assembly:
Representatives: Edna F. Kelly, U.S. Representative from New York; William S. Mailliard, U.S. Representative from California; Francis T. P. Plimpton of New York, Deputy U.S. Representative to the U.N. and Deputy U.S. Representative in the Security Council; and Charles W. Yost of New York, Deputy U.S. Representative in the Security Council.
Alternates: Mercer Cook of Washington, D.C., U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Niger; Charles C. Stelle of Maryland, Deputy U.S. Representative to the Geneva Disarmament Conference; Jonathan B. Bingham of New York, U.S. Representative on the U.N. Economic and Social Council; Sidney R. Yates of Illinois, U.S. Representative on the U.N. Trusteeship Council; and Mrs. lane Warner Dick of Illinois, U.S. Representative on the Social Commission of the U.N. Economic and Social Council.