John F. Kennedy
September 27, 1963

Remarks at Tongue Point, Oregon.
Senator Morse, Senator Neuberger, Congressman Ullman, and Senator Magnuson from Washington, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to express a warm thanks from a citizen from the other side of the country for your warm welcome today.
I came here as a result of--I will not say consistent prodding, but I will say that on every occasion I have seen Senator Morse this matter has come up in one way or another, and, therefore, I felt it incumbent upon me. In looking at the natural resources of the United States, I could not return to Washington safely without coming here to Tongue Point. So we are here today, and we are here to take a look at what is a great national asset. I have been looking at great natural assets, Jackson Hole, our mountain valleys, and all the rest. Well this is a national asset.
A good deal of effort, a good deal of money, a good deal of dedication has gone into building this facility. But I think you can only get an impression of the importance of this facility by coming down and looking at it and standing on it.
Therefore, as a result of the considered judgment of your delegation, and also of the Budget Bureau and the various areas of our Executive, I want to announce that the best first step in reactivating this facility appears to be a multipurpose use.
It is, therefore, a pleasure to be able to tell you that both the Department of Defense and the Coast Guard will shortly initiate activities here. Early next year the Department of Defense will establish a Weapons System Acquisition Management School here at Tongue Point. This school will be jointly staffed by the military departments and provide training for senior civilian personnel and senior military officers for all the services and the Defense Department. And shortly after this training activity begins, the Coast Guard will establish a helicopter rescue base here. Both agencies will soon begin their planning in cooperation with the General Services Administration, and we will go ahead in attempting to see what other multipurpose projects can be brought here so that this facility can be used and so that this community can be benefited.
I am glad I came here. I think it is a national asset, and the wise use of it requires us to consider very carefully what services of Government can be lodged here, because we don't want all this great asset to merely go to waste.
I am glad to be back here. I appreciate the warm welcome, and I can tell you that this area of this State, as well as this State, as well as this country, can continue to look forward with a good deal of confidence and hope.

Thank you.
Note: In his opening words the President referred to U.S. Senators Wayne Morse and Maurine B. Neuberger of Oregon, U.S. Representative Al Ullman of Oregon, and U.S. Senator Warren G. Magnuson of Washington.
On the same day the White House released a statement by the President elaborating on his decision to establish Department of Defense and Coast Guard facilities at Tongue Point.