John F. Kennedy
September 26, 1961

Statement by the President on Making Additional Uranium-235 Available for Peaceful Uses.
PROGRESS in using atomic energy for peaceful purposes is evident in the numerous national and international programs for scientific research and for the development of nuclear power and other applications. Many of the current projects and those contemplated for the future are based on the use of enriched uranium. I am announcing today a further step by the United States to meet the prospective needs for this material.
I have determined under Section 41-b of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 that the amount of enriched uranium to be made available for peaceful uses at home and abroad will be increased to a total of 165,000 kilograms of contained Uranium-235. Of this total 100,000 kilograms is to be available for distribution within the United States under Section 53 of the Atomic Energy Act and 65,000 kilograms for distribution to other countries under Section 54. These amounts have been recommended by the Atomic Energy Commission with the concurrence of the Secretaries of State and Defense. The material will be distributed as required over a period of years and will be subject to prudent safeguards against unauthorized use.
This action increases the amounts of Uranium-235 made available by previous determination announced on February 22, 1956, and July 3, 1957. The new amounts are estimated to cover present commitments and those expected to be made during the next few years under domestic licenses and foreign agreements. The purpose of this announcement is to provide continuing assurance of the availability of enriched uranium for peaceful programs contemplated at home and abroad. As those programs develop in the future, it will undoubtedly be necessary to make further determinations to meet their requirements. The capacity of the United States for producing enriched uranium is sufficient to meet all foreseeable needs for peaceful uses in addition to our defense needs.
A discussion of the new determination is contained in the attached statement by the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission.
Note: The statement by the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, Glenn T. Seaborg, was released with the President's statement at Newport, R.I.
For Presidential determinations of February 22, 1956, and July 3, 1957, see Public Papers of the Presidents, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1956 volume, p. 258, and 1957 volume, p. 528.