John F. Kennedy
September 20, 1962

Remarks on Arrival at the Harrisburg-York State Airport, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Morse, Governor Lawrence, Senator Clark, Mayor Dilworth, distinguished gentlemen:
I want to express my thanks to you for coming to the airport. Eighteen months ago I used to do this six times a day, but I haven't done it for a long time, and we start today, and most appropriately in Pennsylvania, on the fall campaign for 1962.
I think this is a most important election because it involves not only the control of the House and the Senate, but also the kind of government which the States will have, moving, as they must move in their sphere of responsibility, taking care of the needs of their people as we must do it on the Federal level.
I've just come from Washington, D.C., and I think we saw today in the House of Representatives a very clear indication of why this election is so important. We passed in the House of Representatives by 5 votes an agricultural bill which will save this country nearly a half-billion dollars, as well as protect the economic rights of American agriculture; and we lost in the House of Representatives a bill of assistance to higher education, and three-fourths of the Republican Party voted against it.

So I think that on today, and many other days, on many issues which affect the welfare of this country, issues which must go to the Hill, to the House and the Senate, we see vote after vote moving in our favor by 1 or 2 or 3 or 4, or losing it by 1 or 2 or 3 or 4. And that's why I come to Pennsylvania and express the strong hope that you will send back to the United States Senate Senator Clark, who has represented this State with distinction; and that you will elect as Governor, Governor Dilworth to succeed Governor Lawrence; and that you will elect Members of the House and the Congress who will speak for Pennsylvania and speak for the people.
I come here and ask your support in an election just as important as any that takes place, in 1960 or 1964, and that is to elect a Congress which will move with the Executive in establishing progress in this country.
Thank you for coming here today. This is the beginning of a long and important campaign.

Thank you.
Note: The President's opening words referred to Democratic State Chairman Otis B. Morse IV, Governor David L. Lawrence, and U.S. Senator Joseph S. Clark, all of Pennsylvania, and to former Mayor Richardson Dilworth of Philadelphia, Democratic candidate for Governor of Pennsylvania.