John F. Kennedy
April 18, 1961

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House Transmitting Bill for a New Department of Urban Affairs and Housing
Dear Mr.____________:
I am transmitting for consideration by the Congress draft legislation to carry out the recommendation in my March ninth message on housing and community development calling for the creation of a new cabinet Department of Urban Affairs and Housing.
Two problems standing near the top of our national priority list are first, preventing the appalling deterioration of many of our country's urban areas and rehabilitating the cities of our nation which currently contain 70% of our people--a figure that is constantly growing--and second, insuring the availability of adequate housing for all segments of our population. Since the National Housing Agency was established in 1942, the activities of the Federal Government in housing and in working with States and local communities in the rebuilding of our urban areas and in preventing their deterioration has increased steadily. The importance of this area of Federal activity merits recognition by the establishment of the Department of Urban Affairs and Housing. Thus, the new Secretary of Urban Affairs and Housing will be in a position to present the nation's housing and metropolitan development needs to the Cabinet and will by virtue of his position provide the necessary leadership in coordinating the many Federal programs in these fields.
In addition to the draft bill, I am enclosing a letter from the Director of the Bureau of the Budget describing the legislation in detail. A letter identical to this one is being sent to the Speaker of the House of Representatives (President of the Senate).
I hope that prompt action can be scheduled on this important legislation and that the Congress will act favorably on the proposal.

Sincerely,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable Sam Rayburn, Speaker of the House of Representatives.