John F. Kennedy
August 01, 1961

Remarks at Ceremonies Marking the 15th Anniversary of the Fulbright Exchange Program.
WE WANT to express our great pleasure at having this opportunity to celebrate the 15th anniversary today of the signing of the legislation which led to the Fulbright program.
Of all the examples in recent history of beating swords into plowshares, of having some benefit come to humanity out of the destruction of war, I think that this program in its results will be among the most preeminent.
As a result of this program, which permits this exchange of representative scholars, students, educators, artists, from our country to countries around the world, from their countries to our country--as a result of this program and the related Smith-Mundt program, over 50,000 people have been permitted to come to a greater understanding of the benefits of our culture and civilization, and the culture and the civilization of other countries.
This program has been most important in bettering the relations of the United States with other parts of the world. It has been a major constructive step on the road to peace. And therefore in a most troubled time in the life of our country and in the history of the world, I think it's most appropriate that we celebrate the 15th anniversary of the Fulbright program.
I want to express our great appreciation to Senator Fulbright who created this program, and who has carefully guarded its integrity since its founding.
We are delighted that Senator Smith is ,with us today again and Senator Mundt who have also shown great interest in the related program, and members of the Department of State.
And it is particularly fortunate that at this time Senator Fulbright and the members of the Foreign Relations Committee are working on a major program to improve and to move this great effort ahead over the next years.
So, Senator Fulbright, we want to congratulate you, and I hope that by this ceremony that we emphasize this most important phase of our international relations.
Note: The ceremonies were held in the Rose Garden at the White House. In his remarks the President referred to J. W. Fulbright, U.S. Senator from Arkansas, H. Alexander Smith, former U.S. Senator from New Jersey, and Karl E. Mundt, U.S. Senator from South Dakota.
Remarks by Senator Fulbright and former Senator Joseph C. O'Mahoney of Wyoming were also released.