John F. Kennedy
February 28, 1962

Statement by the President Upon Receiving Report of the Presidential Railroad Commission.
IN DECEMBER 1960, President Eisenhower established, at the joint request of the nation's railways and the five unions representing the some 250,000 workers who operate the trains, a Presidential Railroad Commission. This Commission was composed of representatives of the railway unions and carriers, designated by them, and public members appointed by the President. On March 5, 1961, I appointed Judge Simon H. Rifkind to be chairman of the Commission. By the mutual and voluntary agreement of the parties, the Commission was charged with the duty to study the dispute in the railroad industry over work rules and practices and to submit to the President and to the parties a report of its findings and recommendations for the amicable settlement of the dispute.
Today, I have received the report of the Commission. It represents more than a year's work, during which, I am informed, over 15,500 pages of oral testimony was given before the Commission, and more than 300 exhibits filed with it. In addition, special studies were made for the Commission by its staff and by outside experts. The work of the Commission represents an exhaustive study of the relations between the railroads and their operating employees.
As provided for in the memorandum of agreement entered into between the parties in October 1960, the report is remanded to them for their appropriate consideration. Under the terms of their agreement, this report is not an arbitration award. Rather it is a study by men who have conscientiously tried to ascertain the facts as they exist and to make recommendations based on these facts. It is now up to the parties themselves to consider these recommendations and, as they have agreed, to enter into immediate and expeditious collective bargaining over the issues which remain in dispute. I believe the report will be useful in this task.
The good offices of the National Mediation Board and the Secretary of Labor are available to help the parties reach agreement.
I cannot point out too strongly that while the carriers and the unions have great responsibilities to their respective interests they have an overriding responsibility to the national interest to provide the most efficient and safe rail transportation possible. I know that both sides agree with me that in serving the national interest first they serve their own interest best.
The railroads and their employees are important national assets which we must conserve. Their survival as a healthy industry and an outstanding work force vital to our economy depends to a large extent upon their cooperative ability to modernize and improve their services and practices in the face of increasing competition from other of the Presidents means of transportation. In doing this, the human aspect of the equation must not be overlooked.
The railroad industry is a conspicuous illustration of the problem of changing technology. While seeking ways in which to reap the benefits of advancing technology, it is necessary at the same time to preserve basic human interests.
These demands--service to the public, modernization of the industry, protection of the legitimate rights of the workers--are the basic issues that lie on the bargaining table. I am sure that the mature wisdom of both parties, experienced as they are through many years of labor-management relations, can resolve these issues sensibly and amicably.
I commend the members of the Commission for their diligent efforts on the report they have submitted. The report contains the unanimous views of the public members, the dissenting views of the labor members and the supplemental views of the carriers. I am sure that it represents the sincere views of the various parties. I especially wish to extend my personal thanks and appreciation to Judge Simon H. Rifkind, the Commission chairman, for devoting his time and energies to the work of the Commission and for bringing his great competence and integrity to bear on its operation. Judge Rifkind has rendered another fine contribution to his already outstanding record of public service.
Note: The Presidential Railroad Commission was established by Executive Order 10891 of November 1, 1960 (25 F.R. 10525). Appointment of the 15 members of the Commission was announced by President Eisenhower on December 22, 1960 (see 1960-61 vol., this series, p. 880).
The Commission's report, dated February 1962 (Government Printing Office, 1962, 576 pp.) and a summary fact sheet (18 pp.) were released with President Kennedy's statement.