John F. Kennedy
February 26, 1963

Executive Order 11088—Assigning Emergency Preparedness Functions to the Secretary of the Treasury
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, including authority vested in me by Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1958 (72 Stat. 1799), it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1.Scope.The Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafier referred to as the Secretary) shall prepare national emergency plans and develop preparedness programs covering the functions assigned to him in this order. These plans and programs shall be designed to develop a state of readiness by the Department of the Treasury with respect to all conditions of national emergency, including attack upon the United States.
SEC. 2.Functions.The Secretary shall develop policies, plans, and procedures for the performance of emergency functions with respect to (1) stabilization aspects of the monetary, credit, and financial system; (2) collection of revenue; (3) regulation of financial institutions; (4) supervision of the Federal depository system; (5) direction of transactions in government securities; (6) tax and debt policies; (7) participation in bilateral and multilateral financial arrangements with foreign governments; (8) regulation of foreign assets in the United States and of foreign financial dealings; (9) development of procedures for the manufacture, and/or issuance and redemption of securities, stamps, coins, and currency; (10) development of systems for the issuance and payment of Treasury checks; (11) maintenance of the central government accounting and financial reporting system; (12) administration of customs laws, tax laws, laws governing import, manufacture, and distribution of narcotics, and laws on control of alcohol, alcoholic beverages, and tobacco; (13) suppression of counterfeiting and forgery of government securities, stamps, coins, and currency; (14) protection of the President and the Vice President; (15) granting of loans (including participation in or guarantees of loans) for the expansion of capacity, the development of technological processes, or the production of essential material; and (16) provisions for port security, search and rescue on the high seas, aids to maritime navigation, and enforcement of marine inspection laws and navigation laws.
SEC. 3.Resources Evaluation.The Secretary shall provide for appropriate participation in the national resources evaluation program administered by the Office of Emergency Planning.
SEC. 4.Research.The Secretary and the Office of Emergency Planning shall cooperate in research in areas involving the Departments responsibilities under this order.
SEC. 5.Functional Guidance.The Secretary, in carrying out the functions assigned in this order, shall be guided by the following:
(a)Interagency cooperation.The Secretary shall assume the initiative in developing joint plans for the coordination of emergency monetary and credit programs of those departments and agencies which have responsibilities dependent on the policies or capabilities of the Department. The Secretary shall also participate in the coordination of emergency monetary and credit policies with emergency price, wage, and rent control policies. He shall utilize to the maximum those capabilities of other agencies qualified to perform or assist in the performance of assigned functions by contractual or other agreements.
(b)Presidential coordination.The Director of the Office of Emergency Planning shall advise and assist the President in determining policy for the performance of functions under this order and in coordinating the performance of such functions with the total national preparedness program.
(c)Emergency planning.Emergency plans and programs, and emergency organization structure required thereby, shall be developed as an integral part of the continuing activities of the Department of the Treasury on the basis that it will have the responsibility for carrying out such programs during an emergency. The Secretary shall be prepared to implement all appropriate plans developed under this order. Modifications and temporary organizational changes, based on emergency conditions, will be in accordance with policy determinations by the President.
SEC 6.Emergency Actions.Nothing in this order shall be construed as conferring authority under Title III of the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, as amended, or otherwise, to put into effect any emergency plan, procedure, policy, program, or course of action prepared or developed pursuant to this order. Such authority is reserved to the President.
SEC 7.Prior Actions.To the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions of any prior order and the provisions of this order, the latter shall control.
JOHN F. KENNEDY

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 26, 1963