John F. Kennedy
February 06, 1962

Remarks at the Presentation to the White House of President Wilson's Typewriter.
LAST FALL I received a letter from Mr. David Lawrence who informed me that President Wilson's typewriter was at the American Red Cross, and because of our interest in attempting to acquire things which were associated with our Presidents he thought that we should--suggested that we might get in touch with the Red Cross and see if they would be willing to turn it back to the White House.
I called General Gruenther and he informed me that the typewriter belonged to the Grayson family. This typewriter had been Government issue. I think it was in the White House during President Wilson's administration, and it was sold, I understand from Professor Link, during the Harding administration as surplus. And it came into the possession of Admiral Grayson, who had been associated with President Wilson, and has continued to be a valuable possession of the Grayson family.
The Grayson family were very generous enough to agree to have it come to the White House, and we are most indebted to them, because we know what a valuable source of satisfaction it was to them because of the association with their father.
So we are very appreciative to them and we are very glad to have this come to the White House. It was on this typewriter that he typed his Fourteen Points and other messages. We are going to put it on exhibit here in the White House so that the million people who come every year can see it, because it reminds us of a distinguished President and of the distinguished role he played in the life of our country.
So we thank you all--members of the family-General Gruenther--the Red Cross-Mr. Lawrence, for reminding us of this-Professor Link, for his valuable works on the life of President Wilson. And this is my wife has collected everything and this is my--[laughter]--this is the only thing I have produced, with their help.
Note: The President spoke at 10 a.m. in his office at the White House. The ceremony was attended by David Lawrence, journalist and publisher; Gen. Alfred M. Gruenther, President of The American Red Cross; Arthur S. Link, professor of history at Princeton University and editor of the Wilson papers; and members of the family of the late Adm. Cary T. Grayson, President Wilson's physician.