John F. Kennedy
February 26, 1963

Executive Order 11087—Assigning Emergency Preparedness Functions to the Secretary of State
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, including authority vested in me by Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1958 (72 Stat. 1799), it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1.Scope.The Secretary of State (hereinafter referred to as the Secretary) shall prepare national emergency plans and develop preparedness programs designed to permit modification or expansion of the activities of the Department of State and of agencies, boards, and commissions under his jurisdiction in order to meet all conditions of national emergency, including attack upon the United States.
SEC. 2.Functions.The Secretary shall develop policies, plans, and procedures for carrying out his responsibilities in the conduct of the foreign relations of the United States under conditions of national emergency, including, but not limited to (1) formulation, negotiation, and implementation of contingency and post-emergency plans with our allies and of the intergovernmental agreements and arrangements required by such plans; (2) formulation, negotiation, and execution of measures affecting the relationships of the United States with neutral States; (3) formulation and execution of political strategy toward hostile or enemy States, including the definition of war objectives and the political means for achieving those objectives; (4) maintenance of diplomatic representation abroad; (5) reporting and advising on conditions overseas which bear upon the national emergency; (6) carrying out or proposingeconomicmeasures with respect to other nations, including coordination with the export control functions of the Secretary of Commerce; (7) mutual assistance activities such as ascertaining requirements of the civilian economies of other nations, making recommendations to domestic resource agencies for meeting such requirements, and determining the availability of and making arrangements for obtaining foreign resources required by the United States; (8) providing foreign assistance, including continuous supervision and general direction of authorized economic and military assistance programs for friendly nations and determination of the value thereof; ( 9 ) protection or evacuation of American citizens and nationals abroad and safeguarding their property; (10) protection and/or control of international organization and foreign diplomatic, counsular, and other official personnel and property, or other assets, in the United States; and (11) documentary control of persons seeking to enter or leave the United States.
SEC. 3.Research.The Secretary and the Office of Emergency Planning shall cooperate in research in areas involving the Department's responsibilities under this order.
SEC. 4.Resources Evaluation.The Secretary shall provide for appropriate participation in the national resources evaluation program administered by the Office of Emergency Planning.
SEC. 5.Functional Guidance.The Secretary, in carrying out the functions assigned in this order, shall be guided by the following:
(a)Interagency cooperation.The Secretary shall provide to all other departments and agencies foreign policy guidance, leadership, and coordination in the formulation and execution of those emergency preparedness activities which may have foreign policy implications, affect foreign relations, or depend, directly or indirectly, on the policies and capabilities of the Department of State.
(b)Presidential coordination.The Director of the Office of Emergency Planning shall advise and assist the President in determining policy for the performance of functions under this order and in coordinating the performance of such functions with the total national preparedness program.
(c)Emergency planning.Emergency plans and programs, and emergency organization structure required thereby, shall be developed as an integral part of the continuing activities of the Department of State on the basis that it will have the responsibility for carrying out such programs during an emergency. The Secretary shall be prepared to implement all appropriate plans developed under this order. Modifications and temporary organizational changes, based on emergency conditions, will be in accordance with policy determinations by the President.
SEC. 6.Emergency Actions.Nothing in this order shall be construed as conferring authority under Title III of the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, as amended, or otherwise, to put into effect any emergency plan, procedure, policy, program, or course of action prepared or developed pursuant to this order. Such authority is reserved to the President.
SEC. 7.Redelegation.The Secretary is hereby authorized to redelegate within the Department of State the functions hereinabove assigned to him.
SEC. 8.Prior Actions.To the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions of any prior order and the provisions of this order, the latter shall control.
JOHN F. KENNEDY

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 26, 1963