John F. Kennedy
January 16, 1962

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House on Reorganization of the Department of the Army.
Dear Mr.____________:
I have approved a plan for the reorganization of the Department of the Army. This plan was recommended by the Secretary of the Army after detailed study and approved by the Secretary of Defense. A copy of the reorganization plan is enclosed herewith.
I am also enclosing for transmission to the Chairman of the Armed Services Committee a communication from the Secretary of Defense reporting, pursuant to section 202(c) (1) of the National Security Act of 1947, as amended, the action to be taken with reference to abolition of certain statutory officers and the transfer of their functions to the Secretary of the Army.

Sincerely,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
As outlined in the committee print "Reorganization of the Department of the Army" (Hearing 43, House Committee on Armed Services, Feb. 5, 1962) the key features of the plan are as follows:
1. Creation of a Materiel Development and Logistic Command.
2. Establishment of an Army Combat Developments Command.
3. Assignment to the U.S. Continental Army Command of responsibility for all individual and unit training throughout the Army, except certain highly specialized training such as the Military Academy and Army War College.
4. Transfer of certain operating functions of the Army General Staff to the new commands and agencies to be created.
5. Establishment of an Office of Personnel Operations.
6. Realignment of the Army Special Staff and Operating Agencies.
The proposal also calls for the elimination of the following officers created by statute and for the transfer of their functions to the Secretary of the Army: Chief Signal Officer, Chief of Finance, Adjutant General, Quartermaster General, Chief of Ordnance, Chief Chemical Officer, Chief of Transportation. The reorganization became effective on February 16, 1962.