John F. Kennedy
January 21, 1963

Statement by the President on the Restoration of Peace in the Congo.
THE END of secession announced by the provincial regime in Katanga and confirmed by the peaceful entry of United Nations forces into Kolwezi today is warmly welcomed by the United States and all who are concerned with the future of the Congo and the whole of Africa. This secession has been a serious source of contention and an obstacle to progress in the Congo for the past two and a half years.
The United States objective in the Congo is neither more nor less than the establishment of conditions under which the Congolese people themselves can peacefully work out their own future. This was impossible as long as the territorial integrity of the nation was challenged by secessions, with consequent political instability and a standing invitation to intervention by the great powers.
The previous administration determined wisely that the United States goal could best be pursued through the United Nations; and the present administration has supported vigorously the United Nations' efforts to bring about peaceful reunification in the Congo for the past two years. Under incredibly difficult circumstances and often against heavy odds, the United Nations has carried through successfully its most complex and difficult peacekeeping mission on behalf of the world community.
At this favorable turn of events in the Congo, the American people are deeply indebted to the Secretary General of the United Nations, to his predecessor who gave his life in the quest for peace in that troubled country, and to those member nations which have loyally supported the United Nations efforts in the Congo throughout this crisis. The steadfast cooperation with the United Nations provided by the Government of Belgium, a country with close historical ties with the Congo, has been of special value in bringing about a peaceful conclusion to the crisis. The United Nations will continue to have an important role to play in helping the Congo with the great task of modernization, which is the most pressing goal of the leaders and people of that nation. To this task we will give our full support.
The Congolese leaders face a tremendous challenge in healing the wounds of conflict, restoring a partially disrupted economy, and building a strong and viable federal nation. This is a venture calling upon the full energies and talents of all the Congolese people. I am confident that President Kasavubu, Prime Minister Adoula, and the other Congolese leaders, who have contributed so greatly to a solution of the crisis, will continue to move in a spirit of true cooperation to work out permanent constitutional and other necessary political and economic arrangements. The people of the Congo now have a unique opportunity to rally behind their national and provincial leadership in a combined effort for unity and progress.