John F. Kennedy
January 17, 1963

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Prime Minister Fanfani.
PRESIDENT Kennedy and President of the Council Fanfani, with their advisors, have today concluded two days of cordial and constructive conversations on the principal international problems of common interest to the United States and Italy.
The meeting has given an opportunity for an exchange of views on recent international developments with special emphasis on the evolving relationship between the United States and Europe.
In this connection, the President amplified the position of the United States with respect to the possible development of a NATO multilateral nuclear force within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The Prime Minister expressed great interest in the possibility of such a force and agreed that the United States proposals should receive the most serious consideration by all members of the Alliance. The President and the Prime Minister agreed on the need to modernize both the nuclear and conventional weapons and forces which their countries contribute to the Alliance.
In the course of the examination of the political and economic situation in Europe, the Prime Minister stressed Italy's continuing effort in support of European economic integration and the entry of Great Britain into the Common Market. The President agreed with the Prime Minister that increasing integration would bring greater political solidity and prosperity to Europe and permit it to participate more effectively in the policy of assisting underdeveloped areas, in which effort Italy and the United States reaffirm their feeling of special commitment.
The two leaders reviewed the work which has been undertaken to reach a disarmament agreement with adequate safeguards and a controlled cessation of nuclear testing. They agreed on the necessity to further prepare for the forthcoming Geneva Conference and expressed the hope that this conference would achieve positive results.
President Kennedy and President of the Council Fanfani reaffirm the intention of their respective Governments to press forward in 1963 with the important task of promoting the interests of the peoples of the United States and Italy working toward the consolidation of world peace and fulfilling their commitments to these ends.