John F. Kennedy
January 16, 1963

Letter to the Chairman in Response to the Report of the Administrative Conference of the United States.
[ Released January 16, 1963. Dated January 15, 1963 ]
Dear Judge Prettyman:
I have received the excellent report of the Administrative Conference of the United States and its recommendations respecting future organization which you submitted to me. It contains many valuable suggestions for improving administrative procedure, and I have instructed the appropriate Government departments to consider them and report to me upon the best method to assure their implementation. I am confident that actions on these recommendations will contribute materially to improved administration of Federal regulatory programs.
I am disappointed that you are not available to continue your leadership in this field. This would be especially important in connection with the future organization of any instrumentality to replace the Conference. I hope, however, that you will be able to lend your advice and counsel in connection with our consideration of this matter.
The accomplishments of the Administrative Conference of the United States were due, in large measure, to the interest and effort of the members of the Conference. They displayed a high sensitivity to the public interest. Your own willingness to devote your time and energy to that important undertaking and the dedication to public service which you have demonstrated in this and so many other ways are very much appreciated.

Sincerely,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
[Honorable E. Barrett Prettyman, Senior Circuit Judge, United States Court of Appeals, Washington 1, D.C.]
Note: The "Final Report of the Administrative Conference of the United States," released by the White House on January 6, consists of two documents. The first, dated December 15, 1962, entitled "Summary of the Activities of the Conference" and contains 30 recommendations for improving the procedures of Federal agencies (49 PP., with appendixes, processed). The second, in the form of a letter to the President dated December 17, evaluates the need for continuing studies of administrative procedures and recommends the establishment, by Congress, of a permanent Administrative Conference of the United States for this purpose (17 pp., processed).
The Conference was established by Executive Order 10934 of April 13, 1961 (3 CFR, 1961 Supp., p. 102).