John F. Kennedy
July 19, 1961

Remarks on the Youth Fitness Program.
THE STRENGTH of our democracy and our country is really no greater in the final analysis than the well-being of our citizens. The vigor of our country, its physical vigor and energy, is going to be no more advanced, no more substantial, than the vitality and will of our countrymen.
I think in recent years we have seen many evidences in the most advanced tests, comparative tests, that have been made that many of the boys and girls who live in other countries have moved ahead of younger people in this country in their ability to endure long physical hardship, in their physical fitness and in their strength.
This country is going to move through difficult days, difficult years. The responsibilities upon us are heavy, as the leader of the free world. We carry worldwide commitments. People look to us with hope, and if we fail they look to those who are our adversaries.
I think during this period we should make every effort to see that the intellectual talents of every boy and girl are developed to the maximum. And that also their physical fitness, their willingness to participate in physical exercise, their willingness to participate in physical contests, in athletic contests--all these, I think, will do a good deal to strengthen this country, and also to contribute to a greater enjoyment of life in the years to come.
This is a responsibility which is upon all of us--all of us who are parents--to make sure that we stress this phase of human life and human existence. It is also the responsibility of our schools--and our schools have been doing a great deal to meet this responsibility--of our school administrators and school committees, and communities, and states. And also, of course, it is a matter of vital interest to our national Government.
To members of school boards, school administrators, teachers, the pupils themselves, and their parents, I am directing this urgent call to strengthen all programs which contribute to the physical fitness of our youth.
I strongly urge each school in the United States to adopt the three specific recommendations of our National Council on Youth Fitness.
First, to identify the physically underdeveloped pupil and work with him to improve his physical capacity. And if he will work and the school will work together, a great deal can be done.
Two: Provide a minimum of 15 minutes of vigorous activity every day for all of our school students, boys and girls alike.
Three: Use valid fitness tests to determine pupil physical abilities and to evaluate their progress.
The adoption of these recommendations by our schools will insure the beginning of a sound basic program of physical development, exercise, and achievement.
I want to urge that this be a matter of great priority. "A sound mind and a sound body" is one of the oldest slogans of the Western World. I am hopeful that we will place a proper weight on intellectual achievement, but in my judgment, for the long-range happiness and well-being of all of you, for the strengthening of our country, for a more active and vigorous life, all of you as individuals and as groups will participate in strengthening the physical well-being of young American boys and girls.
This is a matter of importance, and I am hopeful that we can move ahead in the coming months.

Thank you very much.
Note: Shortly after the end of his news conference of July 19 the President returned to the rostrum and spoke to the members of the press who remained for the occasion. His remarks were recorded on film and tape for distribution to schools and to other interested groups. An abridged revision of the remarks appears as a foreword to the pamphlet "Youth Physical Fitness--Suggested Elements of a School-Centered Program" published by the President's Council on Youth Fitness (Government Printing Office, July 1961 ).