John F. Kennedy
July 03, 1961

Letter to the Attorney General Directing Him To Petition for an Injunction in the Maritime Strike.
Dear Mr. Attorney General:
On June 26, 1961, by virtue of the authority vested in me by Section 206 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 176), I issued Executive Order No. 10949, creating a Board of Inquiry to inquire into the issues involved in a labor dispute between certain ship owners and operators in the United States foreign and domestic trades and certain of their employees represented by: the National Maritime Union of America; the Seafarers International Union of North America; the National Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association; the International Organization of Masters, Mates, and Pilots; the American Radio Association; the Radio Officers Union; and the Staff Officers Association of America.
On July 3, 1961, I received the Board's written report in the matter. I understand you have a copy of that report.
In my opinion this unresolved labor dispute has resulted in a strike affecting a substantial part of the maritime industry, an industry engaged in trade, commerce, and transportation among the several States and with foreign nations, which strike, if permitted to continue, will imperil the national health and safety.
Therefore, in order to remove a peril to the national health and safety and to secure a resumption of trade, commerce, and transportation among the several States and with foreign nations, I direct you, pursuant to the provisions of Section 208 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947, to petition in the name of the United States any District Court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties to enjoin the continuance of such strike and for such other relief as may in your judgment be necessary or appropriate.

Very sincerely yours,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
Note: On July 3 the Attorney General sought and obtained in the District Court for the Southern District of New York a temporary injunction against continuation of the strike, which was made permanent in a decision of July
Terms of various contracts were agreed upon during the course of the injunction, the terms of the final contract being reached on October The Board's reports of July 2 and September 1, 1961, were made available through the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
The letter was released at Hyannis, Mass.