John F. Kennedy
July 06, 1961

Remarks to the Executive Board of the United Steelworkers of America.
I AM GLAD to learn, President McDonald, that you and the members of the executive board of your great union have been meeting today with the Secretary of Labor and Under Secretary of Commerce to discuss the problems concerning employment and unemployment which face our Nation.
These problems were highlighted yesterday when the Department of Labor reported that although economic recovery had pushed employment to an all-time record level in June the percentage of unemployed remained at the same high level it has held for the past 7 months. Certainly, as representatives of workers in the steel industry who experienced the greatest curtailment of employment of any group of workers during the recent recession, you are well aware of the need for the Nation's economy to provide more jobs.
I can assure you that we in this administration will continue to devote ourselves to seeking ways to make sure that eventually every one of our fellow citizens who is willing and able to work can find a job.
In attempting to carry out this task I am most grateful for the support given my Executive actions and legislative program by the United Steelworkers of America. Without the help of organizations such as yours we would not have been able to achieve passage of the temporary extended unemployment insurance program or the Area Redevelopment Act, to name but two vital areas where your support was important

And I am especially pleased that the support you gave was predicated on a recognition of the public interest.
You have also shown this public responsibility in your support of our foreign policy.
That time in our history is passed when our relations with other nations, conditioned by great geographical barriers between us, represented the exclusive concern of governments and diplomats. It is now a matter of personal involvement for every citizen and for the free institutions that our citizens have built to express and protect their interests. The support of such institutions, like labor unions, is vital to the successful execution of our policy. I am happy to have this opportunity to thank you and your membership personally for the support you have given.
Note: The President spoke at the White House. In the opening paragraph he referred to David J. McDonald, President, United Steelworkers of America, Secretary of Labor Arthur J. Goldberg, and Under Secretary of Commerce Edward Gudeman.