John F. Kennedy
June 15, 1962

Letter to the Attorney General Directing Him To Petition for an Injunction in the Republic Aviation Corporation Strike.
Dear Mr. Attorney General:
On June 7, 1962, by virtue of the authority vested in me by Section 206 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 U.S.C. 176), I issued Executive Order No. 11025, subsequently amended on June 8, 1962, by Executive Order No. 11026, and further amended on June 13, 1962, by Executive Order 11029, creating a Board of Inquiry to inquire into issues involved in labor disputes between Republic Aviation Corporation, Farmingdale, New York, and certain of its employees represented by the International Association of Machinists; Republic Lodge 1987, International Association of Machinists, AFL-CIO; Local 775, United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe fitting Industry of the United States and Canada, AFL-CIO; International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local Union 25, AFL-CIO; Local Union 1318, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, AFL-CIO; and International Union of Operating Engineers, Local Unions 30 and 30-A, AFLCIO; and in a labor dispute between John G. Sharp, Cafeteria Concessionaire at this Republic Aviation Corporation facility and certain employees represented by Local 164, Hotel and Restaurant Employees and Bartenders' International Union, AFL-CIO.
On June 14, 1962, I received the Board's written report in the matter. I understand you have a copy of that report.
In my opinion these unresolved labor disputes have resulted in a strike affecting a substantial part of the tactical fighter production industry, which is part of the aircraft industry of the United States, and which is engaged in trade, commerce, and transportation among the several states; which strike, if permitted to continue, will imperil the national safety.

Therefore, in order to remove a peril to the national safety and to secure a resumption of trade, commerce, and transportation among the several states, I direct you, pursuant to the Provisions of Section 208 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947, to petition in the name of the United States any District Court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties to enjoin the continuance of such strike and for such other relief as may in your judgment be necessary or appropriate.

Sincerely yours,
JOHN F. KENNEDY
Note: On June r5 the Attorney General sought and obtained in the District Court for the Eastern District of New York a temporary restraining order, and on June 20, after a full hearing, the parties were enjoined from taking part in any strike or lockout.
Terms of the various contracts were agreed upon during the course of the injunction. The Board's reports of June 13 and August 13 (with addendum dated August 28) were made public by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.