John F. Kennedy
June 13, 1961

Statement by the President on the Appointment of deLesseps Morrison as U.S. Ambassador to the Organization of American States.
I AM PLEASED and gratified to announce that Mayor deLesseps Morrison, of New Orleans, has agreed to serve as United States Ambassador to the Organization of American States.
In accepting this post Mayor Morrison has agreed to undertake one of our most important and difficult diplomatic posts. For the future of this hemisphere--the progress of its people and the maintenance of freedom-will largely depend on the vigor and effectiveness of the Organization of American States. The OAS is the principal instrument through which the American Republics--acting together--can attack their common problems: the elimination of social injustice, the attack on economic stagnation, the alleviation of the discontent which flows from poverty and hunger, and the maintenance of free society against the attacks of those who are bent on its destruction. If the OAS can help perform these tasks and solve these problems then the future strength and welfare of the Americas will be assured. If the OAS should falter--if it fails to take the lead--then our freedom, and our security itself, will be in danger.
I have asked Mayor Morrison to assume this most critical post--at this critical time-as a service to his nation and to the hemisphere. His experience and ability will help us to build an OAS capable of meeting the new demands of the coming decade. He has been active in Latin American affairs for more than fifteen years. During that period he has won the respect and friendship of the people and leaders of Latin America. His presence in the OAS will symbolize the great importance which this government attaches to that-organization. And his skill will assure the United States of dynamic and effective representation.
Mayor Morrison will be one of the leaders of the American delegation to the IAECOSOC meeting to be held in Montevideo, Uruguay in mid-July.