John F. Kennedy
June 28, 1961

Memorandum on the United Fund and Community Chest Campaigns.
To the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
United Funds and Community Chests this fall will make their annual appeals throughout the country and among Federal civilian and military personnel for the support of more than 28,000 health, welfare and recreation organizations. Many of these campaigns will include such national agencies as the Red Cross, USO, and others working to eliminate disease and secure the health of us all. Altogether they will be seeking to raise more than $470,000,000 in the largest of all voluntary fund-raising appeals.
We who work in the Government want to assume our full citizen's share of the voluntary support of health and welfare services. The United Fund and Community Chest campaigns provide us with an opportunity to contribute to a wide variety and a large number of organizations through a single appeal.
The Honorable Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of Defense, will serve as Vice Chairman for the Federal Government of United Community Campaigns of America. I am confident everyone will extend full cooperation to the Vice Chairman in these campaigns. Such cooperation should, under the Federal policy on voluntary fund-raising, include the effective solicitation of all employees, the acceptance of equitable unit goals, and the setting up of an adequate collection method for the convenience of those who wish to make contributions on an installment basis.
It is my hope that employees of your department in each community where it conducts its operations will give thoughtfully and generously to these campaigns.
JOHN F. KENNEDY
Note: On August 1 the White House announced the appointment by the President of Secretary of Commerce Luther B. Hodges as chairman of the Government Unit for the United Givers Fund campaign. In a memorandum to the departments and agencies announcing Secretary Hodges' appointment, the President stated that "our Nation's Capital can and should be an example to the Nation in building a healthy and strong community through the American tradition of voluntary giving to assist those less fortunate. The UGF agencies that provide comfort to the aged, help to those afflicted with mental illness or crippling disease, counsel and guidance to those beset with family and personal problems, and character building youth activities are truly dedicated to this great tradition. Meeting these human needs requires the support of all Government personnel and I have complete confidence that they will meet this opportunity and responsibility."