John F. Kennedy
June 12, 1962

Remarks Upon Presenting Certificates to Graduates of the Capitol Page School.
FIRST I want to congratulate you and the teachers and the parents. I don't know whether the pages are exempted from the Child Labor Act, but I know you carry on work and school. How many of you are going to college from here? Perhaps you can hold up your hands. That you have been able to carry through a working school, be admitted to college, and at the same time work in the House and Senate as you do long hours I think is very admirable. I want to express from my own experience in both the House and Senate very warm appreciation to all of you. How many are here from the Senate and how many from the House?
How many were there in 1960 in the Senate?
I must say after 14 years with the Congress, I think we have been most fortunate in having a most unusual group of boys. I also hope, as a result of coming here, that you are not in any way disillusioned by political experience, but instead will choose to come back here yourselves as members of the House and Senate. If you don't do that and follow some other career that you choose, maintain your interest in political life in both of our parties.
You have had an unusual experience, and you don't want to let it go to waste. There are too few people in this country who understand how the Congress works. Having been exposed to this at a very significant time in your lives, it would be a shame if you did not use that experience in a way that would be useful to our country.
I want to congratulate the parents who were willing to let their sons leave home and go to work and work hard. It has been an opportunity for them, and I hope you will continue to stimulate their interests.
Over the years the records of the boys who have been here have been most unusual; so we expect great things from you. I know this is just the beginning of a great career which I hope will be marked by public service not only in the Congress, but also perhaps in other places. It is here, so it is available to all of you.
Note: The President spoke at noon on the portico at the White House, following which he presented Presidential Certificates to the graduates. Prior to his remarks the graduating class was introduced by Henry L. De Geyser, Principal of the Capitol Page School.