John F. Kennedy
June 30, 1962

Joint Statement following Discussions With President Lopez Mateos.
PRESIDENT Adolfo Lopez Mateos and President John F. Kennedy have held a series of conversations which mark a new era of understanding and friendship between Mexico and the United States.
Both Presidents reaffirmed the dedication of their countries to the ideals of individual liberty and 'personal dignity which constitute the foundation of a civilization which they share in common. In consonance with their dedication to these ideals and acting always as sovereign and independent countries, which decide their own policies and their own courses of action, they propose to respect and maintain the principles of non-intervention whether this intervention may come from a continental or extra-continental state--and of self-determination of peoples. Therefore they are resolved to uphold these principles in the international organizations to which they belong, to defend and strengthen the democratic institutions which their peoples, in the exercise of their sovereign rights, have constructed, and to oppose totalitarian institutions and activities which are incompatible with the democratic principles they uphold.
Both Presidents fully accept the responsibility of every sovereign nation to form its own policies, without outside dictation or coercion. They also recognize that the Republics of the Hemisphere share the commitment they have freely accepted, in accordance with the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance and the Charter of the Organization of American States to defend the Continent, and to foster the fundamental democratic values. This principle of common responsibility, without impairment of national independence, is the cornerstone of the Organization of American States.
Another dimension of this principle was expressed at the Punta del Este Conference in August of 1961. The two Presidents reaffirm their support of the Charter of Punta del Este and of the program of accelerated social and economic progress which that Charter embodies. In fact, Mexico and the United States, together with the other countries of the Inter-American system, are closely associated in a vast endeavor, without precedent, to promote the well-being of all the inhabitants of the Hemisphere.
President Kennedy recognized that the fundamental goal of the Mexican Revolution is the same as that of the Alliance for Progress-social justice and economic progress within the framework of individual freedom and political liberty.
The two Presidents also discussed the economic and social development program of Mexico. President Kennedy reaffirmed his country's commitment, made in the Charter of Punta del Este, to continue to cooperate with the Government of Mexico in the endeavor which it and the Mexican people are carrying out to accelerate the economic and social well-being of all the inhabitants of the Republic. The two Presidents agreed that the Alliance for Progress is essentially a program of mutual cooperation, in which the greater effort should come primarily from the nation which is seeking its development. Mexico and the United States are determined, so far as they are concerned, to continue such effort until hunger, poverty, illiteracy and social injustice have been eliminated from this Hemisphere.
The two Chiefs of State concurred in the need of intensifying the efforts which are being made through the various international organizations including the United Nations, the Inter-American system, and the European economic community to achieve expanding levels of trade, with special attention to the elimination of discriminatory and restrictive practices against exports of basic commodities from Latin America. They agreed that it is indispensable that a broadened and more stable market should be provided in order to improve the income of the exporting countries. Of such income, workers and farmers should have an equitable share to permit increases in their levels of living. Cotton, coffee, sugar and metals were the subject of special discussion.
The two Presidents discussed the importance of achieving higher rates of economic growth in their respective countries. They agreed that government has an essential role in stimulating and supplementing the efforts of private enterprise for attaining this objective, especially through sound economic and fiscal policies. Both Presidents agreed that inflation and financial instability have an adverse effect on economic development and the level of living of the general public. President Lopez Mateos expressed the continued determination of his Government to pursue policies which would promote financial stability and economic growth and President Kennedy promised the cooperation of his Government toward that end.
The two Heads of State exchanged views on the importance of the United Nations in promoting international understanding and peace and in encouraging economic and social progress. They decided, in consequence, that their Governments should consult each other with the view of cooperating even more closely in all matters which maintain and strengthen the purposes and principles of the San Francisco Charter.
Both Presidents expressed the strong desire that, within the scope of the United Nations and particularly at Geneva, negotiations should continue for general disarmament as well as for the termination of nuclear tests, both based upon effective means of control.
Both Heads of State feel gratified by the manner in which their Governments are collaborating in the eradication of illegal drug traffic, and agreed to redouble their efforts and their cooperation to put an end to this criminal activity.
The two Presidents reviewed the progress of the joint undertaking of their countries in constructing the Amistad Dam and Reservoir Project and expressed satisfaction that this project is proceeding on schedule.
The two Presidents discussed the problem of Chamizal. They agreed to instruct their executive agencies to recommend a complete solution to this problem which, without prejudice to their juridical position, takes into account the entire history of this tract.
In relation to the problem of salinity of the waters of the Colorado River, the two Presidents discussed the studies which have been conducted by the scientists of the two. countries. The two Presidents noted that water which the United States plans to release during the winter of 1962-63 for river regulation and such other measures as may be immediately feasible should have the beneficial effect of reducing the salinity of the waters until October, 1963• They expressed their determination, with the scientific studies as a basis, to reach a permanent and effective solution at the earliest possible time with the aim of preventing the recurrence of this problem after October, 1963.
The Presidents finished their conversations by emphasizing their determination that whatever temporary difficulties may at times arise between Mexico and the United States, the two Governments should resolve them in a spirit of close friendship, inasmuch as they are fundamentally united in defense of those values of liberty and personal dignity which their revolutionary ancestors struggled to establish.
Note: The joint statement was released in Mexico City.