John F. Kennedy
March 07, 1961

Statement by the President Upon Signing Order Establishing the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity.
I AM TODAY issuing an Executive Order combining the President's Committee on Government Contracts and the President's Committee on Government Employment Policy into a single President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity.1
1Executive Order 10925, dated March 6, 1961, 26 F.R. 1977.
Through this vastly strengthened machinery I intend to ensure that Americans of all colors and beliefs will have equal access to employment within the government, and with those who do business with the government.
The implementation of this policy has been hampered by lack of personnel, by inadequate procedures and ineffective enforcement. As a result Americans who are members of minority groups have often been unjustly denied the opportunity to work for the government or for government contractors.
This order provides for centralization of responsibility for these policies under the Vice-President. It requires the Secretary of Labor--with all the resources of the Department of Labor at his command--to supervise the implementation of equal employment policies. And it grants, in specific terms, sanctions sweeping enough to ensure compliance.
In this order I am also directing a complete study of current government employment practices--an examination of the status of members of minority groups in every department, agency and office of the Federal government. When this survey--the most thorough ever undertaken--is completed we will have an accurate assessment of our present position and a yardstick by which to measure future progress.
I have dedicated my Administration to the cause of equal opportunity in employment by the government or its contractors. The Vice-President, the Secretary of Labor and the other members of this committee share my dedication. I have no doubt that the vigorous enforcement of this order will mean the end of such discrimination.
In this connection I have already directed all Departments to take immediate action to broaden the government employment opportunities for members of minority groups.