John F. Kennedy
May 26, 1962

Remarks to Members of the National Council of Senior Citizens.
My old friend and colleague, Congressman Forand, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to welcome you to the White House and tell you how much we appreciate the support that you have given our efforts to provide medical care for the aged.
I believe that we are going to be successful, as I said last Sunday, if not this year--and I believe that we have a very good prospect of being successful this year--then certainly next year. But I believe that this is the year that we should attempt to secure the passage of this most important legislation. It will serve our citizens as effectively as social security has served them, and I hope that when I become a senior citizen myself, which is getting closer and closer, that I will have an opportunity to support as effective a cause as you are supporting in the days of your retirement.
This is in the interests of our senior citizens and all those who will some day occupy that exalted station. In addition, it serves their children--your children, and others upon whom the burden of medical care falls most heavily.
This is a matter which affects our entire population, and with the long and distinguished record of service which the social security system has rendered, I believe that we have an opportunity, in our time, to build that edifice even more strongly.
We are fighting, in a sense, an old fight. And we're opposed by those who have opposed, in other days, progress. But we shall be successful, and when we are, a good deal of the obligation for that success, a good deal of the thanks for that success, will rest with Congressman Forand, and with all of you.
So we're very glad to have you here at the White House, and to tell you how welcome you are.
Note: The President spoke at 10:30 a.m. in the Rose Garden. In his opening words he referred to former Representative Aime I. Forand of Rhode Island, chairman of the National Council of Senior Citizens.