John F. Kennedy
May 30, 1961

Transcript of Interview With the President Recorded for French TV and Radio.
THE PRESIDENT. I am very happy to welcome you to the White House.
Q. Mr. President, what is your view of Europe's political and economic unity, and what role will the United States play in it?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, one of the most encouraging post-war developments in the entire free world has been the economic and increasing political unity of Europe. The United States has supported strongly this movement, because we feel that a strong Europe strengthens freedom, and we have been much impressed by the leadership which France has given to that movement. We hope it will spread through Europe. I think it offers the greatest security for us all in the years to come. So we are very much behind your efforts in that regard.
Q. Do you think, Mr. President, that the disarmament talks will be resumed in July and that they have a chance of succeeding?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I'm most hopeful that the conversations which are taking place now at Geneva, on the matter of securing an agreement with the Soviet Union on the cessation of nuclear tests, will be successful. This is the easiest kind of agreement to reach, because it's possible to patrol it most effectively. So far, however, we have not made the progress we had hoped to make. The insistence on a veto on all inspections makes it extremely difficult for us to set up any realistic, effective inspection--and responsible inspection--system. So that we have not been as encouraged as we hoped we would be. But we will keep working at Geneva, if we can make a success there, then we can move with greater confidence into the disarmament conversations in July and August. If we fail at Geneva, on nuclear testing, then our problem of disarmament will be that much more serious. So, this is a very critical time for these efforts.
Q. Mr. President, do you intend to establish a geographic limitation on Communist penetration in Southeast Asia and not to let it go beyond that?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the French know more about Southeast Asia perhaps than certainly any Western people and they know the difficulty of the problems involved there. The danger in Southeast Asia--as we have seen in Laos and we see now in Vietnam-is not .of overt aggression across boundary lines by foreign armies but rather by the effective use of guerrillas, which have--for example in Vietnam--have assassinated in the last twelve months two thousand civil officers of the government and two thousand local policemen, and are carrying on a very vigorous effort to seize control of the Government by guerrilla means. But it's true there; we've seen in Laos and we will see in other parts of Southeast Asia as time goes on. So we will attempt to assist the governments which want to remain free to maintain themselves, but it's going to be a very hard and difficult road for us all in Southeast Asia.
Q. More specifically with regard to aid to underdeveloped countries, Mr. President, what are the general lines of your policy following your special message to the Congress on March 22?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think there are three points to it. First, that I think that all of us who live in the prosperous areas of the West must make a concerted national and international effort to assist the people of the underdeveloped world--who have their political independence but who live on the marginal edge of existence in many cases--to move toward a better life. Because, if they feel they cannot do it under a system of freedom, then they will turn to a totalitarian system. So that I think we all have to make a greater effort--in the United States, in Western Europe, in all free countries that are moving ahead themselves.
Secondly, I think that this effort should be based in part upon the willingness of the countries themselves to make effective long-range economic plans which will provide, over a period of years, a better life for their people. So that we make sure that our aid is given to countries that can use it effectively and use it for the people.
And third, the aid should be committed over a long period of time. One of our troubles has been that we have appropriated money by the year and it makes it difficult to have the kind of economic planning which will bring success.
A greater effort by us all; second, a greater effort by the underdeveloped countries themselves; and third, a commitment of aid over a longer period of time to permit long-range economic planning. Those are the three principles for which we now stand.
Q. Lastly, Mr. President, what do you expect from your talks with Mr. Khrushchev?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think it's important--when there are so many serious issues which involve us both, involve the West with the Sino-Soviet bloc--that we should have some communication with Mr. Khrushchev. This is a dangerous time for us all, and if we can, by having a communication, lessen the chance of miscalculation--which could lead to a very dangerous situation, and hazard for all people--I think that we should have those conversations. If we can reach a greater understanding, on the question of testing and disarmament, perhaps on Laos, perhaps on the general matters which divide us, I think that it would make it easier for us to look forward with hope for the future. So, I have not met Mr. Khrushchev, and we meet in Vienna.
Q. Well, Mr. President, I should like to thank you and, on behalf of my fellow countrymen, to wish you a good trip and a pleasant stay in France.
THE PRESIDENT. Merci beaucoup.
Note: The interview was conducted on May 20 by Pierre Crenesse, Director in North America for Radiodiffusion-Television Francaise.