John F. Kennedy
May 07, 1962

Executive Order 11021—Administration of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands by the Secretary of the Interior
WHEREAS the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands was placed under the trusteeship system established in the Charter of the United Nations by mean of a trusteeship agreement. approved by the Security Council of the United Nations on April 2, 1947, and by the United States Government on July 18, 1947, after due constitutional process (hereafter referred to as the trusteeship agreement); and
WHEREAS the United States of America was designated under the terms of the trusteeship agreement as the administering authority of the Trust Territory referred to above (hereinafter referred to as the trust territory ); and
WHEREAS the United States has heretofore assumed obligations for the civil administration of the trust territory and has carried out such civil administration under the provisions of Executive Orders Nos. 9875 of July 18, 1947, 10265 of June 29, 1951, 10408 of November 10, 1952, and 10470 of July 17, 1953; and
WHEREAS thereunder the Secretary of the Navy is now responsible for the civil administration of the Northern Mariana Islands except the Island of Rota and the Secretary of Interior is responsible for the civil administration of all of the remainder of the trust territory; and
WHEREAS it appears that the purposes of the trusteeship agreement can best be effectuated at this time by placing in the Secretary of the Interior responsibility for the civil administration of all of the trust territory:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Act of June 30, 1954 (68 Stat. 330; 48 U.S.C. 1681) and as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1.Responsibility of Secretary of the Interior.The responsibility for the administration of civil government in all of the trust territory, and all executive, legislative, and judicial authority necessary for that administration, are hereby vested in the Secretary of the Interior. Subject to such policies as the President may from time to time prescribe, and in harmony with applicable law, and, where advantageous, in collaboration with other departments and agencies of the Government, the Secretary of the Interior shall take such actions as may be necessary and appropriate to carry out the obligations assumed by the United States as the administering authority of the trust territory under the terms of the trusteeship agreement and under the Charter of the United Nations:Provided however,That the authority to specify parts or all of the trust territory as closed for security reasons and to determine the extent to which Articles 87 and 88 of the Charter of the United Nations shall be applicable to such closed areas, in accordance with Article 13 of the trusteeship agreement, shall be exercised by the President:And provided further,That the Secretary of the Interior shall keep the Secretary of State currently informed of activities in the trust territory affecting the foreign policy of the United States and shall consult with the Secretary of State on questions of policy concerning the trust territory which relate to the foreign policy of the United States, and that all relations between the departments and agencies of the Government and appropriate organs of the United Nations with respect to the trust territory shall be conducted through the Secretary of State.
SEC. 2.Redelegation of authority.The executive, legislative, and judicial authority provided for in section 1 of this order may be exercised through such officers or employees of the Department of the Interior, or through such other persons under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior, as the Secretary may designate, and shall be exercised in such manner as the Secretary, or any person or persons acting under the authority of the Secretary, may direct or authorize.
SEC. 3.Cooperation with Department of the Interior.The executive departments and agencies of the Government shall cooperate with the Department of the Interior in the effectuation of the provisions of this order.
SEC. 4.Prior orders.To the extent not heretofore superseded or otherwise rendered inapplicable, the following are hereby superseded:
(1) Executive Order No. 10265 of June 29, 1951.
(2) Executive Order No. 10408 of November 10, 1952.
(3) Executive Order No. 10470 of July 17, 1953.
SEC. 5.Saving provisions.(a) Existing laws, regulations, orders, appointments, or other acts promulgated, made, or taken by the Secretary of the Interior or his delegates under the authority of Executive Order No. 10265, as amended and in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this order, shall remain in effect until they are superseded in pursuance of the provisions of this order.
(b) Nothing contained in this order shall be construed as modifying the rights or obligation of the United States under the provisions of the trusteeship agreement or as affecting or modifying the responsibility of the Secretary of State to interpret the rights and obligations of the United States arising out of that agreement.
SEC. 6.Effective date.The provisions of this order shall become effective on July 1, 1962.
JOHN F. KENNEDY

THE WHITE HOUSE,

May 7, 1962