John F. Kennedy
October 17, 1963

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the President of Yugoslavia.
THE President of the United States of America John F. Kennedy and the President of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Josip Broz Tito held conversations in Washington on October 17 in which Secretary of State Rusk, Under Secretary of Political Affairs Harriman, and Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Tyler also participated for the United States and Vice President of the Federal Assembly Todorovic, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs Koca Popovic and Ambassador Midunovic for Yugoslavia.
The meeting provided a timely opportunity for a useful exchange of views on a number of important matters both in regard to the international situation and to United States-Yugoslav relations. The talks took place in a cordial and friendly atmosphere, and were characterized by frank discussion.
President Kennedy and President Tito agreed that the Treaty Banning Nuclear Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water was a significant initial step in lessening international tension. They concluded that, with determined effort and support from all nations willing to make their contribution further progress could be made in reducing the danger of war and in ensuring a basis for world peace. Both Presidents reaffirmed their strong support for the United Nations and declared their wish that all countries would endeavor by their activities to increase its effectiveness.
President Kennedy and President Tito reviewed the evolution of the relations between the United States and Yugoslavia. President Tito conveyed the thanks of the peoples and the Government of Yugoslavia for the American assistance of earlier years and expressed particular appreciation for the help recently extended to. the victims of the Skoplje earthquake. The two Presidents expressed the hope that relations between the two countries, now that direct assistance is no longer needed, could be further developed in all other fields, particularly in the expansion of normal trade, of economic contacts, and of cultural, scientific and other exchanges.