John F. Kennedy
October 25, 1962

Message to the Acting Secretary General of the United Nations.
Excellency:
I deeply appreciate the spirit which prompted your message of yesterday.
As we made clear in the Security Council, the existing threat was created by the secret introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba, and the answer lies in the removal of such weapons.
In your message and your statement to the Security Council last night, you have made certain suggestions and have invited preliminary talks to determine whether satisfactory arrangements can be assured.
Ambassador Stevenson is ready to discuss these arrangements with you.
I can assure you of our desire to reach a satisfactory and peaceful solution of the matter.
JOHN F. KENNEDY
[His Excellency U Thant, Acting Secretary General of the United Nations]
Note: In his message the Acting Secretary General stated that he had been asked by the permanent representatives of a large number of the member governments of the United Nations to appeal to the President in the critical situation. They felt, he said, that in the interest of international peace and security all concerned should refrain from any action which might aggravate the situation and bring about a risk of war. In their view it was important, he further stated, that time should be given to the parties concerned to get together with a view to peacefully resolving the crisis. This would involve a voluntary suspension of all arms shipments to Cuba on the one hand, he said, and a voluntary suspension of the quarantine measures involving Cuban-bound ships on the other. He believed a 2 or 3 weeks suspension period would greatly ease the situation and give time for the parties to meet and discuss the problem. He also stated that he had sent an identical message to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union. Mr. Thant's message, dated October :24, is printed in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 47, P. 740).
For the U.S. statement before the Security Council, referred to by the President, see the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 47, P. 723).