John F. Kennedy
September 27, 1961

Remarks in Newport Upon Announcing the Appointment of John McCone as Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Admiral, Mr. Dulles, Mr. McCone:
I want to express, first, our appreciation to you, Admiral, for your hospitality this morning and that of the U.S. Navy.
I have just one announcement. I have asked Mr. John McCone to accept the responsibility of being the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and Chairman of the Joint Intelligence Board, and have asked him to assume this responsibility later in the fall.
When Mr. Allen Dulles and I had our conversation last November, and when I asked him to continue on in his responsibility as Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, he agreed to do so for a year. He and I have been concerned this summer that this agency should continue to serve as an effective instrument of our country's policy, and we have been most anxious that we would secure the services of an experienced public servant, and that the transition which would be made this fall should be as smooth and effective as possible.
We are both extremely pleased and satisfied that Mr. John McCone, who has served his country in important positions of responsibility, as Under Secretary of the Air Force in the administration of President Truman, as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission in the administration of President Eisenhower, has agreed to once more come and accept a position of high responsibility.
He has had broad experience. Coming once again to Washington represents a real sacrifice for him. I know that all of us who are concerned with our present responsibilities are extremely happy to have his counsel, extremely happy to have him associated with us.
He will come in about 2 weeks and work with Mr. Dulles, and in November will assume the responsibility.
I would like to say one word about my very strong feelings of appreciation and regard for the present Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. He has a record almost unique, if not unique, in the history of this country. He has served under eight Presidents of the United States, beginning with President Wilson in World War I-Presidents of different parties, serving during different times with different problems. He has brought to their service on each occasion and in each administration a unique regard for the public interest.
I know of no man who is a more courageous, selfless, public servant than Mr. Allen Dulles, and I, therefore, in expressing pleasure at having secured the services of Mr. McCone, want to express my profound regret that at the age of 68, after 10 years in this responsibility, that Mr. Dulles should be retiring. He has agreed to continue to serve as a consultant to me on intelligence matters, and therefore his long experience will be available to the people of this country.
Note: The President spoke at the Naval War College, U.S. Naval Base, Newport, R.I. In his opening words he referred to Vice Admiral Bernard L. Austin, President of the College.