Franklin D. Roosevelt
April 12, 1940

Greeting to the Southern Conference for Human Welfare.
My dear Dr. Graham:
It is with genuine pleasure that I send a word of greeting to the Southern Conference for Human Welfare. It is good that people should come together to discuss the affairs of their community, their State, their nation. This is the very life-blood of the democratic form of Government. I have long had the feeling of being a part of the South. Having established my "other home" in that part of the country, I think I may claim some familiarity with the problems it faces.
While we have at times spoken of the South's problems we have never forgotten its great wealth of human and natural resources. The South has for years given the nation more than its share of children. The South has for a hundred and fifty years sent its agricultural and mineral products to the North and, for that matter, to all parts of the world—and it has not always been paid a fair return for these products.
Many of the measures that the Government has adopted during recent years have carried, along with benefits to the whole nation, especial benefits to the South. The Wage and Hour Law, the AAA program, the Farm Security Administration, the National Labor Relations Act, the Work Projects Administration, Public Works Administration, Civilian Conservation Corps, National Youth Administration and the Reciprocal Trade Agreements have all brought to the South means and resources of a helpful character.
In all of this I am not unmindful of the efforts which the Southern people have made and are making toward the solution of their problems. I am aware of the sacrifices they have made to provide schools for their children. I know of the large financial burdens they have borne in behalf of public health. The South can well be proud of what it has been able to accomplish from its available means. We must find a way to increase its means.
I congratulate you and the Conference on the work that has been done and wish for you even greater success in the future.
Very sincerely yours,
Dr. Frank P. Graham,

Southern Conference for Human Welfare,

Chattanooga, Tennessee.