Franklin D. Roosevelt
April 03, 1933

Message to Congress on Farm Mortgage Foreclosures.
To the Congress:
As an integral part of the broad plan to end the forced liquidation of property, to increase purchasing power and to broaden the credit structure for the benefit of both the producing and consuming elements in our population, I ask the Congress for specific legislation relating to the mortgages and other forms of indebtedness of the farmers of the Nation. That many thousands of farmers in all parts of the country are unable to meet indebtedness incurred when their crop prices had a very different money value is well known to all of you. The legislation now pending, which seeks to raise agricultural commodity prices, is a definite step to enable farm debtors to pay their indebtedness in commodity terms more closely approximating those in which the indebtedness was incurred; but that is not enough.
In addition the Federal Government should provide for the refinancing of mortgage and other indebtedness so as to secure a more equitable readjustment of the principal of the debt and a reduction of interest rates, which in many instances are so unconscionably high as to be contrary to a sound public policy, and, by a temporary readjustment of amortization, to give sufficient time to farmers to restore to them the hope of ultimate free ownership of their own land. I seek an end to the threatened loss of homes and productive capacity now faced by hundreds of thousands of American farm families.
The legislation I suggest will not impose a heavy burden upon the national Treasury. It will instead provide a means by which, through existing agencies of the Government, the farm owners of the Nation will be enabled to refinance themselves on reasonable terms; it will lighten their harassing burdens and give them a fair opportunity to return to sound conditions.
I shall presently ask for additional legislation as a part of the broad program, extending this wholesome principle to the small home owners of the Nation, likewise faced with this threat.
Also, I shall ask the Congress for legislation enabling us to initiate practical reciprocal tariff agreements to break through trade barriers and establish foreign markets for farm and industrial products.