Franklin D. Roosevelt
April 14, 1938

Message to Congress on Stimulating Recovery.
To the Congress:
The prosperity of the United States is of necessity a primary concern of Government. Current events, if allowed to run undisturbed, will continue to threaten the security of our people and the stability of our economic life. The National Administration has promised never to stand idly by and watch its people, its business system and its national life disintegrate. It is because the course of our economics has run adversely for half a year that we owe it to ourselves to turn it in the other direction before the situation becomes more definitely serious.
When this Administration took office it found business, credit and agriculture in collapse. The collapse had followed on the heels of overspeculation in and overproduction of practically every article or instrument used by man. During the processes of overspeculation and overproduction—in the twenties—millions of people had been put to work, but the products of their hands had exceeded the purchasing power of their pocketbooks, with the result that huge surpluses, not only of crops but also of buildings and goods of every kind, overhung the market. Under the inexorable law of supply and demand, supplies so overran demand which would pay that production was compelled to stop. Unemployment and closed factories resulted. Hence the tragic years from 1919 to 1933.
Starting in March, 1933, the Congress and the Administration devoted themselves unceasingly, not only to reestablishing reservoirs of credit, but to putting purchasing power in the hands of the consuming public and actually securing a more equitable distribution of the national income. Thus the downward spiral was stopped—and not merely stopped, but started on an upward course—a trend lasting through four years and a half.
In 1928 the national income was eighty billion dollars; in 1932 it had fallen to less than forty billion dollars.
Since the low point of 1932, each year, including 1937, has shown a steady increase in the income which the Nation produced, reflected in increased wages and salaries, in increased dividends, interest and individual's income. In 1937, the total of our citizens' income had risen to sixty-eight billion dollars.
At the end of 1936 the efforts of the Government to aid in increasing the Nation's purchasing power and in stimulating business had become so well recognized that both the business community and the Government felt that a large measure of the Government's spending activities could be materially reduced.
But the very vigor of the recovery in both durable goods and consumers' goods brought into the picture early in 1937 certain highly undesirable practices, which were in large part responsible for the economic decline which began in the later months of that year. Again production outran the ability to buy.
There were many reasons for this overproduction. One was fear—fear of war abroad, fear of inflation, fear of nation-wide strikes. None of these fears has been borne out. There were other causes of overproduction, and these causes differed in each industry.
The net result of these causes and ill-advised practices was a repetition, on a small scale, of what had happened in 1927, 1928 and 1929 on a much larger scale. In other words, production in many important lines of goods outran the ability of the public to purchase them. For example, through the winter and spring of 1937 cotton factories in hundreds of cases were running on a three-shift basis, piling up cotton goods in the factory and in the hands of middle men and retailers. For example, also, automobile manufacturers not only turned out a normal increase of finished cars, but encouraged the normal increase to run into abnormal figures, using every known method to push their sales. This meant, of course, that the steel mills of the Nation ran on a twenty-four hour basis, and the tire companies and cotton factories speeded up to meet the same type of abnormally stimulated demand. The buying power of the Nation lagged behind.
Thus by the autumn of 1937 the Nation again had stocks on hand which the consuming public could not buy because the purchasing power of the consuming public had not kept pace with the production.
During the same period prior to last autumn, the prices of many vital products had risen faster than was warranted. For example, copper—which undoubtedly can be produced at a profit in this country for from ten to twelve cents a pound-was pushed up and up to seventeen cents a pound. The price of steel products of many kinds was increased far more than was justified by the increased wages of steel workers. In the case of many commodities the price to the consumer was raised well above the inflationary boom prices of 1929. In many lines of goods and materials, prices got so high that buyers and builders ceased to buy or to build.
Once more, as in 1929, the economic process of getting out the raw materials, putting them through the manufacturing and finishing processes, selling them to the retailers, selling them to the consumer, and finally using them, got completely out of balance. The Government of the United States, fearing just such an event, had issued warnings in April, 1937, against these practices of overproduction and high prices. The Federal Reserve System curtailed banking credit, and the Treasury commenced to "sterilize" gold as a further brake on what it was feared might turn into a runaway inflation.
The simple fact is that the laying off of workers came upon us last autumn and has been continuing at such a pace ever since that all of us, Government and banking and business and workers, and those faced with destitution, recognize the need for action.
It should be noted in fairness that since January 1, 1937, the President has recommended to the Congress only four measures of major importance to the business of the country:
1. Legislation to stabilize agriculture. A comprehensive law was approved by me two months ago.
2. Legislation to end serious loopholes in our personal income tax laws. This was enacted last summer.
3. Legislation to put a floor under wages and a ceiling over hours of labor in industry, and
4. Tax legislation to remove inequities from the undistributed profits tax, especially as they affect the smaller type of business. Both this measure and the third are still under consideration by the Congress:
The record speaks for itself. No other measures affecting business have been proposed.
All the energies of Government and business must be directed to increasing the national income; to putting more people into private jobs; to giving security and the feeling of security to all people in all walks of life.
I believe that improvement in Government and business practices must go hand in hand with recovery—that they should be, and will be, a definite aid to recovery. While I do not wish in this message to overemphasize some of the needs, I do want to say that I believe that we must be definitely aware of certain of them—the elimination of future tax-exempt bonds of all kinds of Government agencies; the subjecting of Government salaries and wages of all kinds to Federal and State income taxes; a serious undertaking to solve the railroad problem and the problems of monopolistic practices and price fixing. These are no new subjects; nor have I anything to add to them except the statement that their solution will help and not hurt business.
At the same time, I must repeat what I believe the overwhelming majority of both Houses of the Congress will agree to— that the Congress and the Chief Executive can ill afford to weaken or destroy great reforms which, during the past five years, have been effected on behalf of the American people. In our rehabilitation of the banking structure and of agriculture, in our provisions for adequate and cheaper credit for all types of business, in our acceptance of national responsibility for unemployment relief, in our strengthening of the credit of state and local government, in our encouragement of housing, slum clearance and home ownership, in our supervision of stock exchanges and public utility holding companies and the issuance of new securities, in our provision for social security, the electorate of America wants no backward steps taken.
We have recognized the right of labor to free organization, to collective bargaining; and machinery for the handling of labor relations is now in existence. The principles are established even though we can all admit that through the evolution of time administration and practices can be improved. Such improvement can come about most quickly and most peacefully through sincere efforts to understand and assist on the part of labor leaders and employers alike.
The never-ceasing evolution of human society will doubtless bring forth new problems which will require new adjustments. Our immediate task is to consolidate and maintain the gains achieved.
In this situation there is no reason and no occasion for any American to allow his fears to be aroused or his energy and enterprise to be paralyzed by doubt or uncertainty.
Our situation is vastly different from that which we faced five years ago. Let us use the tools already forged and laid out on the bench.
At this immediate time we suffer from a failure of consumer demand. The hoped for reemployment of this spring is not proceeding fast enough to create an economic upturn.
Therefore the problem calls for action both by the government and by the people.
It cannot be disputed that the national income which was thirty-eight billions in 1932, sixty-eight billions in 1937, is now running at the lesser rate of about fifty-six billions. If it can be increased to eighty billion dollars in the course of the next year or two the whole economic picture will be different. Hundreds of thousands more people will be employed in private industry, hundreds of thousands fewer will be in need of relief, and consumer demand for goods will be greatly stimulated. I do not set eighty billion dollars as the national income goal. It ought to rise in the next decade to more than one hundred billions. I want to make it clear that we do not believe that we can get an adequate rise in national income merely by investing, lending or spending public funds. It is essential in our economy that private funds be put to work and all of us recognize that such funds are entitled to a fair profit.
As citizen income rises, let us not forget that government expenditures will go down and government tax receipts will go up.
How and where can and should the Government help to start an upward spiral?
I propose to the Congress three groups of measures:
1. In the first category I place additional appropriations for the fiscal year beginning July, 1938. These will not put more money in the hands of the consuming public than we are spending in the current fiscal year, but they will prevent men and women from being thrown out of work on July 1. They will stop the spiral from continuing its downward course:
(a) I recommend an appropriation of one billion two hundred and fifty million dollars for the Works Progress Administration, to be used during the first seven months of the next fiscal year. Such a grant is ammunition of the highest grade for attack on recession. It will not greatly increase the present rate of expenditure, but ought to be sufficient to care for the additional men and women who have come or are coming to an end of their unemployment insurance payments.
(b) For the Farm Security Administration an appropriation of one hundred and seventy-five million dollars for the next fiscal year.
(c) For the National Youth Administration the sum of seventy-five million dollars to cover the full fiscal year.
(d) For the Civilian Conservation Corps the sum of fifty million dollars additional to maintain the existing number of camps now in operation.
I call your attention to the fact that these appropriations will avert the laying off of people now receiving assistance from the Federal Government.
In this same category of stopping the downward spiral, I also place the authorization recently given for the lending of money to business enterprises by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. I do so because the greater part of such loans will go to businesses which are in grave danger of shutting down and throwing people out of employment. Some of the money, but, in all probability, only the smaller part of the loans, will enable businesses to employ more people or start new enterprises.
2. In the second category, the Administration proposes immediately to make additional bank resources available for the credit needs of the country. This can be done without legislation. It will be done through the de-sterilization of approximately one billion four hundred million dollars of Treasury gold, accompanied by action on the part of the Federal Reserve Board to reduce reserve requirements by about three-quarters of a billion dollars. The Federal Reserve Board informs me that it is willing to do so. These measures will make more abundant the supply of funds for commerce, industry and agriculture. By themselves, however, monetary measures are insufficient to start us on a sustained upward movement.
As a part of better administration I hope that federal banking supervision can be better coordinated. In addition, I am requesting that the Securities and Exchange Commission consider such simplification of regulations as will assist and expedite the financing, particularly, of small business enterprises.
3. I come, therefore, to the third category which I consider to be vital. The first two categories—maintenance of relief and the expansion of credit—might prove sufficient, but in my judgment other measures are essential. You and I cannot afford to equip ourselves with two rounds of ammunition where three rounds are necessary. If we stop at relief and credit, we may find ourselves without ammunition before the enemy is routed. If we are fully equipped with the third round of ammunition, we stand to win the battle against adversity.
This third proposal relates solely to definite additions to the purchasing power of the Nation by providing new work:
(a) I ask for certain amendments to the United States Housing Authority Act to permit the undertaking of the immediate construction of about $300,000,000 of additional projects. The Federal Housing Administration is prepared to increase the already mounting volume of home and apartment construction.
(b) I ask for a renewal of Public Works projects. I believe that by the expenditure of $450,000,000, and the granting of authority to loan up to $1,000,000,000 to states and their sub-divisions, a vast number of well thought out, needed and permanent public improvements can be undertaken this summer and autumn. I believe that the aid of the Federal Government should be put in optional form—either the existing method of 45 per cent grant and 55 per cent loan, or the advancing of the whole sum as loans to states and their subdivisions without interest. Under such a plan the Federal Government would assume the payment of interest and the borrowing authority would assume the payment of the principal by amortization or rental.
Under either method the ultimate cost to the Federal Government and to the states and their sub-divisions is approximately the same.
It is my thought that the total ultimate out-of-pocket cost to the Federal Government by either or both methods should be limited to one billion dollars, and furthermore that no loans or grants should be made on any state or local projects which cannot be started within six months of the date of the enabling legislation, and completed within a year or a year and a half from the commencement of work.
(c) I recommend the appropriation of $100,000,000 to the Bureau of Public Roads for highways in excess of the amount I have previously recommended in the budget for the fiscal year 1939, but I request that this additional amount be used only for projects which can be definitely started this calendar year.
(d) I recommend an appropriation of $37,000,000 over and above estimates for the immediate undertaking of flood control and reclamation works to be expended on projects already authorized by this or former Congresses.
(e) I recommend the appropriation of $25,000,000 additional for Federal buildings.
A summary of these recommendations falls into two categories:

1. Expenditures from the Treasury for work:

Works Progress Administration $1,250,000,000

Farm Security Administration 75,000,000

National Youth Administration $75,000,000

Civilian Conservation Corps 50,000,000

Public Works Administration 450,000,000

Highways 100,000,000

Flood Control 37,000,000

Federal Buildings25,000,000

$2,062,000,000

2. Loans from the Treasury for work:

Farm Security Administration 100,000,000

Public Works Administration 550,000,000

United States Housing Authority300,000,000

$950,000,000
It should be noted that state and local public works undertaken on a loan basis, instead of a loan and grant basis, will reduce the item in the first classification and increase the item in the second classification.
Let us unanimously recognize the fact that the Federal debt, whether it be twenty-five billions or forty billions, can only be paid if the Nation obtains a vastly increased citizen income. I repeat that if this citizen income can be raised to eighty billion dollars a year the national government and the overwhelming majority of state and local governments will be "out of the red." The higher the national income goes the faster shall we be able to reduce the total of Federal and state and local debts. Viewed from every angle, today's purchasing power—the citizens' income of today—is not sufficient to drive the economic system at higher speed. Responsibility of government requires us at this time to supplement the normal processes and in so supplementing them to make sure that the addition is adequate. We must start again on a long steady upward incline in national income.
I have set my hope, my aim on stabilized recovery through a steady mounting of our citizens' income and our citizens' wealth. And in that process, which I believe is ready to start, let us avoid the pitfalls of the past—the overproduction, the overspeculation and indeed all the extremes- which we did not succeed in avoiding in 1929. In all of this, government cannot and should not act alone. Business must help. I am sure business will help.
We need more than the materials of recovery. We need a united national will.
We need to recognize nationally that the demands of no group, however just, can be satisfied unless that group is prepared to share in finding a way to produce the income from which it and all other groups can be paid. Unjust claims defeat themselves. You, as the Congress, I, as the President, must, by virtue of our offices, seek the national good by preserving the balance between all groups and all sections.
We have at our disposal the national resources, the money, the skill of hand and head to raise our economic level- our citizens' income. Our capacity is limited only by our ability to work together. What is needed is the will.
The time has come to bring that will into action with every driving force at our command. And I am determined to do my share.
The responsibility for making this national will effective rests on every individual whether in the government or in industry, or in finance, or in labor, or in the professional fields. Every man and woman in the United States has the great privilege of making this will productive. And the beneficiary will be the whole of the American people.
Certain positive requirements seem to me to accompany the will- if we have that will.
There is placed on all of us the duty of self-restraint. We still rely on personal responsibility—a responsibility guided by a common conscience. That is the discipline of a democracy. Every patriotic citizen must say to himself or herself, that immoderate statement, appeals to prejudice, the creation of unkindness, are offenses not against an individual or individuals, but offenses against the whole population of the United States.
Use of power by any group, however situated, to force its interest or to use its strategic position in order to receive more from the common fund than its contribution to the common fund justifies, is an attack against, and not an aid to, our national life.
Self-restraint implies restraint by articulate public opinion, trained to distinguish fact from falsehood, trained to believe that bitterness is never a useful instrument in public affairs. There can be no dictatorship by an individual or by a group in this Nation, save through division fostered by hate. Such division there must never be.
Amid the voices which now seek to divide group from group, occupation from occupation, section from section, thinking Americans must insist on common effort in a common endeavor and a common faith in each other. Let every business man set out to use his strength of mind and heart and his confidence in his fellow man and his country. Let every labor leader find not how work can be stopped but how it can be made to proceed smoothly, continuously and fairly. Let every public official consider that his task is to use his authority so that the service he renders is adapted to curbing abuses and helping honest effort. Let every one of us work together to move the life of the Nation forward.
We, a successful democracy, face a troubled world. Elsewhere schools of thought contend that democracy is doomed to failure. They tell us that free speech and the free exchange of views will destroy democracies. My conviction, on the contrary, is that the United States retaining free speech and a free exchange of views can furnish a dynamic example of successful government, provided the Nation can unite in practical measures when the times call for united action. The driving force of a Nation lies in its spiritual purpose, made effective by free, tolerant but unremitting national will.
In the Western Hemisphere the good neighbor policy has so strengthened the American Republics that a spiritual unity in our relations now prevails. Can that good neighbor message be accepted and practised in our national life?
If we accept that high and splendid road this free democracy will give successful answer to the fears and questionings which today trouble the minds and souls of men and women the world over.