Franklin D. Roosevelt
August 15, 1941

Joint Message with Prime Minister Churchill Asking for the Moscow Conference.
We have taken the opportunity afforded by the consideration of the report of Mr. Harry Hopkins on his return from Moscow to consult together as to how best our two countries can help your country in the splendid defense that you are making against the Nazi attack. We are at. the moment cooperating to provide you with the very maximum of supplies that you most urgently need. Already many shiploads have left our shores and n/ore will leave in the immediate future.
We must now turn our minds to the consideration of a more long-term policy, since there is still a long and hard path to be traversed before there can be won that complete victory without which our efforts and sacrifices would be wasted.
The war goes on upon many fronts and before it is over there may be further fighting fronts that will be developed. Our resources, though immense, are limited, and it must become a question as to where and when those resources can best be used to further to the greatest extent our common effort. This applies equally to manufactured war supplies and to raw materials.
The needs and demands of your and our armed services can only be determined in the light of the full knowledge of the many factors which must be taken into consideration in the decisions that we make. In order that all of us may be in a position to arrive at speedy decisions as to the apportionment of our joint resources, we suggest that we prepare for a meeting to be held at Moscow, to which we would send high representatives who could discuss these matters directly with you. If this conference appeals to you we want you to know that pending the decisions of that conference we shall continue to send supplies and material as rapidly as possible.
We realize fully how vitally important to the defeat of Hitlerism is the brave and steadfast resistance of the Soviet Union and we feel, therefore, that we must not in any circumstances fail to act quickly and immediately in this matter on planning the program for the future allocation of our joint resources.

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

WINSTON S, CHURCHILL.