Franklin D. Roosevelt
December 02, 1941

Excerpts from the Press Conference
Q. Mr. President, we were told at the State Department that you had asked Mr. Welles to make certain inquiries of Japanese representatives
THE PRESIDENT: (interjecting) That is correct.
Q. (continuing)—or the Japanese Government, through their representatives, this morning.
THE PRESIDENT: (interjecting) Yes.
Q. (continuing) Is there any indication of the nature of those inquiries?
THE PRESIDENT: Let me put it this way, that
MR. CHARLES HAMILTON: (interposing) Mr. President-
VOICES: Sh—Sh.
THE PRESIDENT: Ask Charlie
MR. CHARLES HAMILTON: (interposing) Never since Mr. Theodore Roosevelt have we needed a big stick as much as we do today, so I am giving this to you. (Hands a big ash cane to the President)
THE PRESIDENT: I think, by Jove—
MR. CHARLES HAMILTON: (interposing) I got it in Wales.
THE PRESIDENT: Charlie, thanks ever so much. That's one thing I have longed for. (Laughter) That's all right. That's a good hefty one. (Holding it up to the reporters) You know, it has got an awfully nice balance ....
Q. Mr. President, you started out to say, "Let me put it this way." (Laughter)
THE PRESIDENT: What was it we were talking about? Was it the—something before Congress, was it?
Q. No.
Q. The nature of the inquiries made of Japan.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, let me put it this way. And this answers a good many questions at the same time. I'll try to make this as short as I can.
As you know, since last April, we have been discussing with the Japanese Government some method to arrive at an objective. The objective was permanent peace in the whole area of the Pacific. It seemed at times as if progress were being made toward that objective. And during that whole period, up to I think it was the end of June, we assumed that as both Nations were negotiating toward that objective, that there would be no act which would be contrary to the desired end of peace.
We were therefore somewhat surprised, the end of June, when the Japanese Government sent troops—I think to a specified over-all total, in other words, a number which would not be exceeded- into Indo-China, after very brief negotiations with the French Vichy Government; at the conclusion of this arrangement the Vichy Government let it be understood rather clearly that they had agreed to this number of troops, principally because they were powerless to do anything else.
Sometime thereafter, after the troops had gone there, the conversations were resumed between Japan and the United States, and for a while they seemed to be making progress. But again we made it perfectly clear that the objective which we were seeking meant the taking of no additional territory by anybody in the Pacific area.
And the other day we got word from various sources that already, in Indo-China, there were large additional bodies of Japanese forces- various kinds of forces- naval, air, and land—and that other forces were on the way; and that even before these other forces had arrived, the number of forces already there had greatly exceeded, in Indo-China, the original amount which the French Government had agreed to, and that the forces that were on the way would still more greatly exceed the original number.
And the question was asked this morning of the Japanese Government, at my request, very politely, as to what the purpose of this was—what the intention of the Japanese Government in doing this was, as to the future; and eliminating, of course, the possibility that it was for the policing of Indo-China, which was an exceedingly peaceful spot beforehand.
And we hope to get a reply to that very simple question shortly.
Q. Was there any time limit put on it?
THE PRESIDENT: No, no. That's a silly question. One doesn't put a time limit on things any more. That's the last century. We are at peace with Japan. We are asking a perfectly polite question. I think that's all .....