Franklin D. Roosevelt
February 18, 1945

Executive Order 9524—AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 9195 OF JULY 7, 1942, PRESCRIBING REGULATIONS RELATING TO AERIAL FLIGHTS BY PERSONNEL OF THE ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, COAST GUARD, AND NATIONAL GUARD
EXECUTIVE ORDER 9524
AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 9195 OF JULY 7, 1942, PRESCRIBING REGULATIONS RELATING TO AERIAL FLIGHTS BY PERSONNEL OF THE ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, COAST GUARD, AND NATIONAL GUARD
February 18, 1945
Executive Order No. 9195 of July 7, 1942, prescribing regulations relating to aerial flights by personnel of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, and National Guard, as amended by Executive Order No. 9458 of July 22, 1944, is hereby further amended as indicated below:
1. The title and preamble of the said order are amended to read as follows:
REGULATIONS RELATING TO AERIAL FLIGHTS BY PERSONNEL OF THE ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, COAST GUARD, AND NATIONAL GUARD, AND OFFICERS OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE DETAILED FOR DUTY WITH THE COAST GUARD
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 20 of the act of June 10, 1922, 42 Stat. 632, as amended by section 6 of the act of July 2, 1926, 44 Stat. 782, by section 18 of the Pay Readjustment Act of 1942, approved June 16, 1942 (56 Stat. 368), and by section 215(a) of the Public Health Service Act, approved July 1, 1944 (58 Stat. 690), I hereby prescribe the following regulations relating to increased pay for personnel of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard and National Guard, and for officers of the Public Health Service detailed for duty with the Coast Guard, when by orders of competent authority they are required to participate regularly and frequently in aerial flights, and when in consequence of such orders they do participate in regular and frequent flights.
2. Subdivision (f) of paragraph 1 of the order is amended to read as follows:
(f) The terms 'student naval flight surgeon' and 'student Public Health Service flight surgeon' shall be construed to include any naval medical officer and any officer of the Public Health Service while detailed for duty with the Coast Guard who is duly appointed and assigned flight instruction leading to the designation of naval flight surgeon or Public Health Service flight surgeon.
3. Paragraphs 4 and 5 of the order are amended to read as follows:
4. Each officer of the Medical Corps of the Army or of the Navy and each officer of the Public Health Service while detailed for duty with the Coast Guard who is duly assigned to duty with any aeronautic headquarters or unit of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard, or assigned to duty at a station where there is an aeronautic unit, and who has qualified as a flight surgeon or as an aviation medical examiner may be required to participate regularly and frequently in aerial flights by the Commanding General of the Army Air Forces, or by such officer or officers as he may designate, for the Army, and by the Chief of Naval Personnel for the Navy and Marine Corps, and by the Commandant of the Coast Guard for officers of the Public Health Service detailed for duty with the Coast Guard; and any orders for such requirement shall remain in force for the entire period of such assignment, except as hereinafter provided in paragraph 12.
5. Each officer, warrant officer, or enlisted man of the Army who is duly assigned to a course of instruction for qualification as aircraft pilot or aircraft observer, and each officer, warrant officer, or enlisted man of the Navy, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard, and each officer of the Public Health Service while detailed for duty with the Coast Guard, who is duly appointed a student aviator, a student aviation pilot, a student aviation observer, a student naval flight surgeon, or a student Public Health Service flight surgeon, shall be required to participate regularly and frequently in aerial flights. Orders for such requirement shall be issued by the Commanding General of the Army Air Forces, or by such officer or officers as he may designate, for the Army, by the Chief of Naval Personnel for the Navy, by the Commandant of the Marine Corps for the Marine Corps, and by the Commandant of the Coast Guard for the Coast Guard and for officers of the Public Health Service detailed for duty with the Coast Guard; and such orders shall remain in force for the entire period of the course of instruction, except as hereinafter provided in paragraph 12.
4. Paragraph 8 of the order is amended to read as follows:
8. Each officer, warrant officer, member of the Army Nurse Corps or Navy Nurse Corps (female), or enlisted man other than those specified in paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, may be required to participate regularly and frequently in aerial flights. Orders for such requirements shall be issued by the Commanding General of the Army Air Forces, or by such officer or officers as he may designate, for personnel commissioned in the Army Air Corps or on duty with the Army Air Forces, by the Secretary of War, or such officer or officers as he may designate, for other branches of the Army, by the Chief of Naval Personnel for the Navy, by the Commandant of the Marine Corps for the Marine Corps, and by the Commandant of the Coast Guard for the Coast Guard and for officers of the Public Health Service detailed for duty with the Coast Guard; and such orders shall remain in force for the entire period of such assignment, except as hereinafter provided in paragraph 12.
5. So much of paragraph 10 of the order as precedes the proviso therein is amended to read as follows:
10. For personnel of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, and National Guard (when in the active military service of the United States and when participating in exercises or performing duties provided for by sections 94, 97, and 99 of the National Defense Act, as amended) and for officers of the Public Health Service detailed for duty with the Coast Guard who are required by competent authority to participate regularly and frequently in aerial flights, the following requirements are prescribed:
6. The third sentence of paragraph 12 of the order is amended to read as follows:
In all other cases such action shall be reported with the reasons therefor, for confirmation to the Commanding General of the Army Air Forces, or to such officer or officers as he may designate, for personnel commissioned in the Army Air Corps or on duty with the Army Air Forces, and to the Secretary of War, or such officer or officers as he may designate, for other branches of the Army, or to the officer who issued the order requiring the person concerned to participate regularly and frequently in aerial flights for the Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard, and for officers of the Public Health Service detailed for duty with the Coast Guard.
7. This order shall be effective as of January 1, 1944.
FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 18, 1945.
Exec. Order No. 9524, 10 FR 2153, 1945 WL 3294 (Pres.)