Franklin D. Roosevelt
February 07, 1934

Proclamation 2074—Appointing Henry Morgenthau, Jr. Director General of Railroads
By the President of the United States of America
A Proclamation
WhereasWilliam H. Woodin has tendered his resignation as Director General of Railroads; and
Whereassuch resignation has been accepted, effective upon the qualification of his successor;
Now, Therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt,President of the United States of America, under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by the unrepealed provisions of the Federal Control Act of March 21, 1918 (ch. 25, 40 Stat. 451), and the Transportation Act, 1920 (ch. 91, 41 Stat. 456), do hereby appoint, effective the seventh day of February, 1934, Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Secretary of the Treasury, as Director General of Railroads in the stead of the said William H. Woodin, and do hereby delegate to, and continue and confirm in him, all powers and authority heretofore granted to and now possessed by the said William H. Woodin as Director General of Railroads; and I do hereby authorize and direct the said Henry Morgenthau, Jr., until otherwise provided by proclamation of the President or by act of Congress, either personally or through such divisions, agencies, or persons as he may authorize, to exercise and perform, as fully in all respects as the President is authorized to do, all and singular the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon me by the said unrepealed provisions of the Federal Control Act of March 21, 1918, and the said Transportation Act, 1920, except designating the agent provided for in section 206 of said act.
In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.
Doneat the City of Washington this 7th day of February, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-four, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and fifty-eighth.

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT
By the President:
CORDELL HULL
Secretary of State.