Franklin D. Roosevelt
July 11, 1933

Proclamation 2050—Pinnacles National Monument-California
By the President of the United States of America
A Proclamation
Whereasit appears that the public interest would be promoted by adding to the Pinnacles National Monument, California, certain adjoining lands for the purpose of including within said monument additional lands on which there are located features of scientific interest and for administration purposes;
Now, Therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt,President of the United States of America, by virtue of the power in me vested by section 2 of the act of Congress entitled "AN ACT For the preservation of American antiquities", approved June 8, 1906 (34 Stat. 225), do proclaim that, subject to all valid existing rights, the following-described lands in California be, and the same are hereby, added to and made a part of the Pinnacles National Monument:
MOUNT DIABLO MERIDIAN
T. 16 S., R. 7 E., sec. 25, W ½;
sec. 26, NE ¼;
sec. 33, N ½, NW ¼, SW ¼, NW ¼, and NW ¼, SW ¼;
sec. 36, W ½.
T. 17 S., R. 7 E., sec. 1, lots 2, 3, NW ¼, SW ¼ and S ½ SW ¼;
sec. 2, SE ¼;
sec. 11, E ½;
sec. 12, W ½;
sec. 13, W ½;
sec. 14, all;
sec. 15, NE ¼, E ½, NW ¼, E ½, SW ¼, and SE ¼;
sec. 22, all;
sec. 23, all;
sec. 24, W ½.
Warning is hereby expressly given to all unauthorized persons not to appropriate, injure, destroy, or remove any feature of this monument and not to locate or settle upon any of the lands thereof.
The Director of the National Park Service, under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior, shall have the supervision, management, and control of this monument, as provided in the act of Congress entitled "AN ACT To establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes", approved August 25, 1916 (39 Stat. 535-536), and acts additional thereto or amendatory thereof.In Witness Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.
Doneat the City of Washington this 11th day of July, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-three, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and fifty-eighth.

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT
By the President:
WILLIAM PHILLIPS
Acting Secretary of State.