Franklin D. Roosevelt
July 03, 1935

Statement on the World Power Conference.
Frank R. McNinch, Chairman of the Federal Power Commission, has been designated by the President as his special representative to attend the meeting of the International Executive Council of the World Power Conference at The Hague, beginning July 15, 1935.
Chairman McNinch will express to the Executive Council the hope of the President that the third plenary meeting of the World Power Conference will be held in the United States under the auspices of the Federal Government in 1936, and will advise the Council that the President has sent a message to the Congress recommending that legislation necessary to this end be enacted.
The World Power Conference is an international organization created in 1923 for the purpose of international discussion and study of the technical, economic, and social problems connected with power development. The Conference is a federation of national groups from forty-eight countries. Its first plenary meeting was held in London in 1924 with some 1,700 delegates in attendance. Its second was held at Berlin in 1930, with 4,000 delegates. It is the third plenary meeting, scheduled for 1936, which it is hoped may be held in the United States in the autumn of that year.
In addition to the plenary meetings, there have been sectional meetings in Basle, Switzerland, in 1926; in London in 1928; in Barcelona and in Tokyo in 1929; and in Stockholm in 1933. In the 1933 meeting, four Scandinavian countries participated: Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Finland.
The national groups in the several countries are, in general, made up of representatives of the Government, of national technical societies and scientific institutions, and of representatives of electrical and allied industries. The individuals forming the membership of the several national committees, as well as those who have taken part in the several meetings of the Conference, have been Government officials having relations with the electrical industry, and other outstanding leaders of each country in the electric power field, both utility and manufacturing, in engineering and in finance.