Franklin D. Roosevelt
June 27, 1942

Joint Statement of President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill on Their Conferences.
The week of conferences between the President and the Prime Minister covered very fully all of the major problems of the war which is conducted by the United Nations on every continent and in every sea.
We have taken full cognizance of our disadvantages as well as our advantages. We do not underrate the task.
We have conducted our conferences with the full knowledge of the power and resourcefulness of our enemies.
In the matter of the production of munitions of all kinds, the survey gives on the whole an optimistic picture. The previously planned monthly output has not reached the maximum but is fast approaching it on schedule.
Because of the wide extension of the war to all parts of the world, transportation of the fighting forces, together with the transportation of munitions of war and supplies, still constitutes the major problem of the United Nations.
While submarine warfare on the part of the Axis continues to take heavy toll of cargo ships, the actual production of new tonnage is greatly increasing month by month. It is hoped that as a result of the steps planned at this conference the respective navies will further reduce the toll of merchant shipping.
The United Nations have never been in such hearty and de-tailed agreement on plans for winning the war as they are today.
We recognize and applaud the Russian resistance to the main attack being made by Germany and we rejoice in the magnificent resistance of the Chinese Army. Detailed discussions were held with our military advisers on methods to be adopted against Japan and the relief of China.
While exact plans, for obvious reasons, cannot be disclosed, it can be said that the coming operations which were discussed in detail at our Washington conferences, between ourselves and our respective military advisers, will divert German strength from the attack on Russia.
The Prime Minister and the President have met twice before, first in August, 1941, and again in December, 1941. There is no doubt in their minds that the over-all picture is more favorable to victory than it was either in August or December of last year.