Franklin D. Roosevelt
June 15, 1935

Executive Order 7075 Reorganizing the N.R.A.
By virtue of and pursuant to the authority vested in me by Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act (48 Stat. 195), as amended by Senate Joint Resolution No. 113, approved June 14, 1935, it is hereby ordered as follows:
1. The National Industrial Recovery Board created by Executive Order No. 6859 of September 27, 1934, is hereby terminated, and to provide for the continuing administration of the provisions of Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act there is hereby created the office of Administrator of the National Recovery Administration.
2. The Administrator of the National Recovery Administration shall administer the provisions of Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act as amended by Senate Joint Resolution No. 113, approved June 14, 1935, and may exercise all of those powers heretofore conferred by Executive Order upon the National Industrial Recovery Board, subject to the limitations upon such powers contained in the said Senate Joint Resolution No. 113, and subject also to the further provisions of this Executive Order. . . . I hereby appoint James L. O'Neill as Acting Administrator of the National Recovery Administration.
3. For the further administration of Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act as amended, there is hereby established the Division of Review. The Division of Review shall assemble, analyze, and report upon the statistical information and records of experience of the operations of the various trades and industries heretofore subject to codes of fair competition, shall study the effects of such codes upon trade, industrial and labor conditions in general, and other related matters, shall make available for the protection and promotion of the public interest an adequate review of the effects of the administration of Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act, and the principles and policies put into effect thereunder, and shall otherwise aid the President in carrying out his functions under the said Title. I hereby appoint Leon C. Marshall Director of the Division of Review.
4. There is hereby established the Division of Business Cooperation, the function and purpose of which shall be to aid in the voluntary maintenance by trade and industrial groups of standards of fair competition, in the elimination of unfair competition in the employment of labor or in trade practices, and in maintaining sources of information and records of experience useful in the work of the Division of Review, and to otherwise assist in effectuating, so far as possible, the policies of the National Industrial Recovery Act as amended. I hereby appoint Prentiss L. Coonley Director of the Division of Business Cooperation.
5. The Administrator . . . shall proceed forthwith to reduce as rapidly as possible the number of persons now employed in the administration of Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act to the number necessary to perform the duties of such Administration as herein, or hereafter, prescribed. . . . I hereby appoint George L. Berry Assistant to the Administrator of the National Recovery Administration to represent labor. . . .
7. All orders and regulations heretofore issued concerning the administration of Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act are hereby modified to the extent necessary to make this order fully effective.