Franklin D. Roosevelt
March 20, 1942

Statement Approving the Suspension of Anti-Trust Proceedings During the War.
I approve of the procedure outlined in your memorandum to me dated March 20, 1942. If it is true that any substantial slowing-up of war production is being occasioned by anti-trust suits, prosecutions, or court investigations, then the war effort must come first and everything else must wait. For unless that effort is successful, the anti-trust laws, as indeed all American institutions, will become quite academic.
No one, of course, should be permitted to escape ultimate prosecution for any violation of law. I am sure that the Departments of Justice, War, and Navy will all cooperate so that-the needs of the war will not be hampered by these court investigations, suits, or prosecutions, but that at the same time the crisis of war will not be used as a means of avoiding just penalties for any wrongdoing. In other words, it must be made very clear that the war effort is being impeded. No right-minded person, or anyone who is conscious of what is at stake, should use the Nation's extremities as an excuse to violate any statute.
Nor indeed should there be any deferment or adjournment of any court investigation, prosecution, or suit unless, after a study and examination with the Attorney General in each specific case, the Secretary of War or of the Navy is satisfied that the war effort will be jeopardized at this time unless such course is followed.
I note from your memorandum that proper steps will be taken to avoid the running of the statute of limitations in any case; and that under no circumstances will there be any delay in the prosecution of acts involving actual fraud upon the Government.
I also heartily approve your intention of making public each determination arrived at by you in accordance with your memorandum. The American people should be informed of each step in their war effort, excepting, of course, any information which may in any way help the enemy in his attempt to destroy us.
While every precaution will be taken to prevent anyone from escaping prosecution if he has violated the anti-trust statutes, whether he is now engaged in war work or not, we must keep our eyes fixed now upon the one all-important primary task to produce more materials at a greater speed. In other words we shall give our attention to first things first.
Very sincerely yours,