Franklin D. Roosevelt
March 20, 1945

Letter Suggesting an Inquiry into Guaranteed Wage Plans.
Dear Justice Byrnes:
I enclose herewith a copy of a letter addressed to me by the Chairman of the War Labor Board under date of December 1, 1944, suggesting the appointment of a commission to inquire into the whole question of guaranteed wage plans, and a copy of a brief report submitted therewith explaining the reasons for the Board's recommended action.
The Board's recommendations were:
"(1) That the whole question of guaranteed wage plans and the possibility of their future development in American industries as an aid in the stabilization of employment and the regularization of production, should now be comprehensively studied on a national scale;
"(2) That such study should be conducted by a specially appointed commission charged with the duty of examining into the experience which industry and labor have thus far had with these plans, and of reporting the facts for the benefit of the country, together with recommendations regarding any further steps in this direction which may seem practical and desirable;
"(3) That such a body would be best able to perform its nationally important tasks if created independently of the War Labor Board by the President; and
"(4) That the President appoint a commission for these purposes."
The inquiry recommended by the National War Labor Board is closely connected with the problems of reconversion and the transition from a war economy to a peace economy. For that reason and in line with your suggestion, I think the Advisory Board appointed by me under Section 102 of the War Mobilization and Reconversion Act of 1944 is particularly qualified and suited to undertake the recommended study. I wish, therefore, that you would ask the Advisory Board to undertake this inquiry and report its findings and recommendations to you and to me.
The Secretary of Labor has made some investigation of this subject and I know she will gladly advise with the Board.

Hon. James F. Byrnes,

Director, Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion,

Washington, D. C.