Franklin D. Roosevelt
May 22, 1940

Message to Congress on Plan V to Implement the Reorganization Act.
To the Congress:
When Reorganization Plan No. IV was submitted to Congress, I did not contemplate the transmittal of any additional plans during the current session. However, the startling sequence of international events which has occurred since then has necessitated a review of the measures required for the nation's safety. This has revealed a pressing need for the transfer of the immigration and naturalization functions from the Department of Labor to the Department of Justice. I had considered such an interdepartmental transfer for some time but did not include it in the previous reorganization plans since much can be said for the retention of these functions in the Department of Labor during normal times. I am convinced, however, that under existing conditions the immigration and naturalization activities can best contribute to the national well-being only if they are closely integrated with the activities of the Department of Justice.
I am, therefore, transmitting herewith Reorganization Plan No. V which I have prepared in accordance with the provisions of section 4 of the Reorganization Act of 1939 (Public, No. 19, 76th Cong., 1st sess.), approved April 3, 1939; and I declare that I have found that such reorganization is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes of section 1 (a) of the act:

1. To reduce expenditures;

2. To increase efficiency;

3. To consolidate agencies according to major purposes;

4. To reduce the number of agencies by consolidating those having similar functions and by abolishing such as may not be necessary; and

5. To eliminate overlapping and duplication of effort.
This Plan provides for transferring the Immigration and Naturalization Service from the Department of Labor to the Department of Justice. While it is designed to afford more effective control over aliens, this proposal does not reflect any intention to deprive them of their civil liberties or otherwise to impair their legal status. This reorganization will enable the Government to deal quickly with those aliens who conduct themselves in a manner that conflicts with the public interest. No monetary savings are anticipated.
I realize that the Congress may adjourn before the termination of the sixty-day period provided under the Reorganization Act, but in that event and in view of the urgency of this matter I hope that it will take such action as will permit this Plan to go into effect.
REORGANIZATION PLAN NO. V
Prepared by the President and transmitted to the Senate and the House of Representatives in Congress assembled, May 12, 1940, pursuant to the provisions of the Reorganization Act of 1939, approved April 3, 1939.
IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE
Section 1. Transfer of Immigration and Naturalization Service.—The Immigration and Naturalization Service of the Department of Labor (including the Office of the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization) and its functions are transferred to the Department of Justice and shall be administered under the direction and supervision of the Attorney General. All functions and powers of the Secretary of Labor relating to the administration of the Immigration and Naturalization Service and its functions or to the administration of the immigration and naturalization laws are transferred to the Attorney General. In the event of disagreement between the head of any department or agency and the Attorney General concerning the interpretation or application of any law pertaining to immigration, naturalization, or nationality, final determination shall be made by the Attorney General.
Sec. 2. Transfer of records, property, and personnel.—All records, property, and personnel (including office equipment) of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and all records, property, and personnel of the Department of Labor used primarily in the administration of functions transferred by this Plan (including officers whose chief duties relate to such administration), are transferred to the Department of Justice: Provided, that any personnel so transferred that may be found by the Attorney General to be in excess of the personnel necessary for the administration of the functions transferred by this Plan, shall be retransfered under existing law to other positions in the Government service, or separated from the service subject to the provisions of section 10 (a) of the Reorganization Act of 1939.
Sec. 3. Transfer of funds.— So much of the unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, or other funds available (including funds available for the fiscal year ending June 30,1941) for the use of the Immigration and Naturalization Service or the Department of Labor in the exercise of functions transferred by this Plan as the Director of the Bureau of the Budget with the approval of the President shall determine, shall be transferred to the Department of Justice for use in connection with the exercise of the functions so transferred. In determining the amount to be transferred the Director of the Bureau of the Budget may include an amount to provide for the liquidation of obligations incurred against such appropriations, allocations, or other funds prior to the transfer: Provided, That the use of the unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, or other funds transferred by this section shall be subject to the provisions of section 4 (d) (3) and section 9 of the Reorganization Act of 1939.