Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 23, 1933

Presidential Statement of Non-Intervention in Cuba
During the months which have passed since the fall of the Government of President Machado, we have followed the course of events in Cuba with a most friendly concern and with a consistent desire to be of help to the Cuban people.
Owing to the exceptionally close relationship which has existed between our two peoples since the founding of the Republic of Cuba and in particular because of the treaty relations which exist between our two countries, recognition by the United States of a Government in Cuba affords in more than ordinary, measure both material and moral support to that Government.
For this reason we have not believed that it would be a policy of friendship and of justice to the Cuban people as a whole to accord recognition to any provisional Government in Cuba unless such Government clearly possessed the support and the approval of the people of that Republic. We feel that no official action of the United States should at any time operate as an obstacle to the free and untrammeled determination by the Cuban people of their own destinies.
We have been keenly desirous during all this period of showing by deed our intention of playing the part of a good neighbor to the Cuban people. We have wished to commence negotiations for a revision of the commercial convention between the two countries and for a modification of the permanent treaty between the United States and Cuba. On the economic side, we have been hopeful of entering upon a discussion of such measures as might be undertaken by common consent between the two Governments which would redound to the benefit of both the American and the Cuban people. No progress along these lines can be made until there exists in Cuba a provisional Government which, through the popular support which it obtains and which, through the general cooperation which it enjoys, shows evidence of genuine stability.
As has already been officially stated, the Government of the United States has neither partiality for nor prejudice against any faction or individual in Cuba. It will welcome any provisional Government in Cuba in which the Cuban people demonstrate their confidence. We earnestly hope that in the near future through a spirit of compromise on all sides, the Cuban people themselves will reach a peaceful agreement which may result in general support of a Government and thus avoid continued civil disturbance with its attendant tragic loss of life and grave prejudice to the social and economic interests of the Republic.
Ambassador Welles is returning to Havana within the next few days. As previously announced, upon the termination of his mission, which will be in the near future, he will return to Washington to resume his former duties as Assistant Secretary of State, and will be replaced by Mr. Jefferson Caffery, now serving as Assistant Secretary of State.