Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 25, 1933

Proclamation 2064—Emergency Board, Mobile & Ohio Railroad Company-Employees
By the President of the United States of America
A Proclamation
Whereasthe President, having been duly notified by the Board of Mediation that disputes between the Mobile & Ohio Railroad Company, C. E. Ervin and T. M. Stevens, Receivers, a carrier, and certain of its employees represented by
Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers;
Order of Railway Conductors;
Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen;
Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen;
American Train Dispatchers' Association;
Railway Employees' Department, American Federation of Labor, Federated Shopcrafts;
International Association of Machinists;
International Brotherhood of Blacksmiths, Drop Forgers and Helpers;
Brotherhood of Railway Carmen of America;
International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, Iron Ship Builders and Helpers of America;
Sheet Metal Workers International Alliance;
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers;
Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees;
which disputes have not been heretofore adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, now threaten substantially to interrupt interstate commerce within the States of Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi and Alabama, to a degree such as to deprive that section of the country of essential transportation service;
Now, Therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt,President of the United States of America, by virtue of the power vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the United States, and by virtue of anvd under the authority in me vested by Section 10 of the Railway Labor Act, do hereby create a board to be composed of three (3) persons not pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of railway employees or any carrier, to investigate and report their findings to me within 30 days from this date.
The members of this board shall be compensated for and on account of such duties in the sum of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars for every day actually employed with or upon account of travel and duties incident to such board, from which will be deducted fifteen per cent. (150) as provided in Public No. 2, 73d Congress, Approved March 20, 1933. The members will be reimbursed for and they are hereby authorized to make expenditures for expenses of themselves and of the board, including traveling expenses and in conformity with Public No. 212, 72d Congress, Approved June 30, 1932, 11:30 a.m., not to exceed five ($5.00) dollars per diem for expenses incurred for subsistence.
All expenditures of the board shall be allowed and paid for out of the appropriation "emergency Boards, Railway Labor Act, -May 20, 1926, 1934" on the presentation of itemized vouchers properly approved by the chairman of the board hereby created.
In Testimony Whereof,I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.
Doneat the City of Washington this 25th day of November in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-three, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and fifty-eighth.

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT
By the President:
WILLIAM PHILLIPS
Acting Secretary of State.