Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 14, 1935

Proclamation 2148—Establishment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines

Whereaspursuant to the provisions of the Act of Congress entitled "An Act to provide for the complete independence of the Philippine Islands, to provide for the adoption of a constitution and a form of government for the Philippine Islands, and for other purposes," approved March 24, 1934 (48 Stat. 456), and in accordance with the Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Philippines heretofore adopted and ratified by the people of the Philippine Islands, an election was held in the Philippine Islands on September 17, 1935, for the purpose of electing officers of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines; and
Whereasthe Governor General of the Philippine Islands has certified to me as President of the United States of America the result of the said election:
Now, Therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt,President of the United States of America, under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by the aforesaid Act and in conformity with Section 4 thereof, do announce and proclaim that at the election so held in the Philippine Islands on September 17, 1935, officers of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines were duly elected as follows:
President: Manuel L. Quezon of Baler, Tayabas.
Vice-President: Sergio Osmena of Cebu, Cebu.
Members of the National Assembly: [Here follow the names of the members.]
This Proclamation shall be effective upon its promulgation at Manila, Philippine Islands, on November 15, 1935, by the Secretary of War of the United States of America, who is hereby designated as my representative for that purpose.
And I do further announce and proclaim that, in accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid Act, upon such promulgation of this Proclamation the existing Philippine Government shall terminate and the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines shall enter upon its rights, privileges, powers, and duties as provided under the said Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.
The President cabled Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Common. wealth of the Philippines:
I send my heartiest congratulations upon your inauguration as the first President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and my best wishes for the success of your Administration.
The following message by the President was sent to the Secretary of War, in Manila:
Please convey to President Quezon and the Filipino people on the occasion of the birth of the Commonwealth of the Philippines my sincere congratulations on this great forward step in the establishment of popular self-government and express to them my confidence in their ability to carry out successfully the final steps in the accomplishment of their complete independence.
The President also sent the following cablegram to the Honorable Frank Murphy, United States High Commissioner to the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines:
Please accept the expression of my gratitude and appreciation for the loyal and efficient manner in which you have discharged your duties as Governor General of the Philippine Islands and my congratulations upon your assumption of office as the first High Commissioner of the United States to the Commonwealth of the Philippines. I wish you every success in the important task which lies before you and send you my warmest personal regards.


FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT