Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 15, 1939

Statement on Relief Efforts for Drought Sufferers.
My dear Mr. Hall:
I have the telegram of October twenty-third from you and Mr. John V. Johnson urging consideration of drought relief legislation to meet the need of farmers in twenty-nine States.
Earlier this year I feared that conditions caused by drought might become serious. In order to be prepared to render all possible aid should the drought continue, on July twenty-seventh I therefore directed the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of the Interior, the Work Projects Administrator, and the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps to prepare for an emergency.
The Congress has authorized these agencies to undertake emergency relief action in the event of floods. droughts, or other calamities. For example, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration has authority under such circumstances to make payments for the seeding of legumes and similar close-growing crops where weather has destroyed previous seedings. This assistance has been given in some of the more critically affected areas. Further assistance in the form of loans or grants by the Farm Security Administration is being given where conditions warrant it. The Federal Surplus Commodities Corporation can purchase surplus foods which are distributed to needy families in areas where conditions warrant this action. The Work Projects Administration is giving special consideration to projects in areas where there are many needy families because of drought. Also, allowances have been made in Civilian Conservation Corps enrollment quotas to consider the drought in judging the relief needs in all States.
I recently conferred with members of Congress and officials of the Department of Agriculture about the extent of drought damage, the availability of feed supplies, and measures which seemed most appropriate in alleviating distress as a result of the drought.
According to the crop report issued by the Agricultural Marketing Service as of October 1, 1939, the current crop as well as the apparent supply of both hay and grain are above normal for the country as a whole. Therefore, it appears that there is no shortage in feed supplies. The problem is to get feed into the hands of those who need it. Available facilities already authorized by the Congress appear ample to cope with the situation to the extent that no human suffering will occur. Because of the costs involved in transporting bulky substances, such as feeds, it may be necessary, however, for commercial feeding operations in some of the more seriously affected drought areas to be materially curtailed. In fact, severe drought during several consecutive years has already resulted in such curtailment in certain parts of the West.
I can assure you of my sincere interest in this problem. Federal agencies will continue to carry on coordinated .action and afford every possible relief. A similar reply is being sent to Mr. Johnson.
Very sincerely yours,

Edwin A. Hall,

Esq.,

Binghamton, New York.