Franklin D. Roosevelt
November 15, 1943

Message to Congress on Appropriations for the U.N.R.R.A.
To the Congress:
I am happy to inform the Congress that on November 9, 1943, representatives of 43 Nations and peoples joined with our own Government in signing the accompanying U.N.R.R.A. Agreement, setting up an International Relief and Rehabilitation Administration to give first aid in the liberated areas. This Agreement provides only the framework. The implementation is left to the constitutional lawmaking body of the member states.
The task of the organization will be to assist in furnishing the medicine, food, clothing, and other basic necessities and essential services which are required to restore the strength of the liberated peoples. They have been deliberately stripped by the enemy in order to support the Axis war machine. More than that, the Axis leaders have boasted that as they withdraw, they will leave only devastation—what they have not stolen, they will destroy. 'As our American soldiers fight their way up the Italian boot, they are discovering at firsthand that the barbarism of the Nazis ' is equal to their boasts. Their only rivals in this respect are the Japanese.
U.N.R.R.A. will be able to make only a beginning in the vast task of aiding the victims of war. The greatest part of the job will have to be done by the liberated peoples themselves. What U.N.R.R.A. can do is to help the liberated peoples to help themselves, so that they may have the strength to undertake the task of rebuilding their destroyed homes, their ruined factories, and their plundered farms.
The length of the war may be materially shortened if, as we free each occupied area, the people are enlisted in support of the United Nations' armies.
Already, for example, a new French Army has been created and, as we strike toward Berlin, increasing numbers in Sicily and Italy are falling in step beside the soldiers of the United Nations. Others construct roads and military installations required for our military operations. Millions more are waiting for the moment when they, too, can strike a blow against the enemy.
They do not want charity. They seek the strength to fight, and to do their part in securing the peace. Aid to the liberated peoples during the war is thus a matter of military necessity as well as of humanity.
U.N.R.R.A. will not, of course, be expected to solve the long-range problems of reconstruction. Other machinery and other measures will be necessary for this purpose. What U.N.R.R.A. can do is to lay the necessary foundation for these later tasks of reconstruction.
The devastation and disorganization caused by the Nazi and Japanese war machines is so great that this world disaster can be met only by the united action of the 44 United Nations and associated Nations. Accordingly, under the agreement establishing U.N.R.R.A., it is proposed that each Nation will contribute in accordance with its ability. Each will determine for itself the amount and character of the contribution which it can make.
A small fraction of the national income of the contributing member states will, it is hoped, be sufficient to meet the needs. Some of the liberated Nations may be able to make payment for the supplies and services rendered. But only by bringing to bear the resources of all the United Nations will we be able to relieve a substantial part of the suffering of the millions who will need help.
The nature and the amount of the contribution to be made by the United States will, in accordance with the terms of the U.N.R.R.A. Agreement, be determined by the Congress of the United States under its constitutional procedure.
At this time I recommend to the Congress the enactment of a bill authorizing the appropriation of funds as Congress may from time to time determine to permit the participation by the United States in the work of U.N.R.R.A. I am not now recommending the appropriation of a specific sum. At a later date after the conclusion of the Atlantic City meeting, I shall send to you a further recommendation, informing you of the result of the meeting and requesting the appropriation of specific funds.