Franklin D. Roosevelt
October 04, 1944

Statement on Aid to Italy.
IN ACCORDANCE with the policies with respect to Italy which were outlined jointly by the Prime Minister and me in a statement issued to the press on September 26, measures are now being taken to provide Italy with supplies necessary to prevent civilian hunger, sickness, and fear during the forthcoming winter. Steps are also being taken to restore the damaged transportation and electrical generating facilities of Italy to the extent necessary to enable the Italian people to throw their full resources into the fight against Germany and Japan.
A delegation of supply officers has been called from Italy to Washington to review the needs and requirements of the Italian civilian population. In addition to the substantial quantities of food and clothing which are now being shipped, and have for some time been shipped into Italy, 150,000 tons of wheat and flour are now scheduled for shipment. Steps are being taken to increase the bread ration in those areas in Italy where food supplies are below the standard necessary to maintain full health and efficiency. The distribution of food and essential supplies within the country has been seriously impeded by the damage done to the transportation system and the wholesale commandeering of trucks by the enemy. To meet this emergency need it is planned to send 1,700 additional trucks to Italy.
In addition, preparations are under way to supply substantial quantities of generating equipment including temporary power facilities to furnish electricity to essential industries and public utilities in central Italy which have been brought to a standstill by the almost complete destruction by the Germans of power plants.
The aid which the Allies have already given to Italy has been substantial. Since the invasion of Sicily to the end of this year, 2,300,000 long tons of civilian supplies will have been shipped to Italy. Of this total, 1,107,000 tons were food and the balance consisted of coal, fertilizer, seeds, medical and sanitary supplies, and clothing. As an integral part of military operations the Army has done a great deal to repair roads and bridges and railroads and to repair water and power systems and motor transport.
Through these and other measures of assistance which are now in preparation, the Italian people will be enabled to increase their already significant contribution toward the defeat of the enemy. By doing these things, this country is serving the military aims and objectives of the United Nations which require the greatest possible contribution from the manpower and the resources of every Nation engaged in the final overthrow of Germany and Japan.