Franklin D. Roosevelt
October 13, 1936

Rear-Platform Remarks at Carrollton, Mo.
My friends, I am very glad, after an absence of only a little over a month, to come back into Missouri as the guest of my old friend the Governor, and of you good people.
There is one great advantage that this State has. In order to get from the East to about twenty other States, you have to go through Missouri. And your geographical location is such that you get in this State a pretty good bird's-eye view of people from the East and from the West and from the North and the South. That is one reason why Missouri is a good barometer of political conditions. At the present moment the barometer says, "fair and warmer."
(Audience: "Pretty hot.")
We have had a perfectly grand day coming through another famous State, Kansas. And then this evening, before supper, I attended what I think was the most amazing meeting that I have ever witnessed in my whole career. That new Auditorium in Kansas City is something that everybody in the United States ought to see. And, as for the people in it, that is something that the people in this country ought to hear.
It has been a wonderful outpouring, a very wonderful reception, that I have had all through today; and let me tell you that I am very, very grateful for it. It leads me to believe that my conclusion is right: that the people of this country today are taking a greater and a more intelligent interest in national affairs and the problems of the country than ever before in our history-and that is a grand thing.
The registration figures in every part of the country show that there are going to be more votes cast three weeks from today than we have ever had before in the past; and I am not the least bit afraid of the results as long as everybody gets out and votes.
There is another thing that has appealed to me, on this trip and on the other trips I have made all through this year, even on that trip when I went out to look at the drought areas of the country, and that is that we have more security and a greater degree of prosperity and, incidentally, a sounder prosperity than we have had for a good many years.
I believe that if we can only keep on going, not stopping just where we are, there are lots of things still to be done. There are any number of improvements still to be made; and we do not want to turn the Government back to a point of view which will cause that progress to stop.
I am confident that we are going forward for four years to come.