Franklin D. Roosevelt
October 14, 1936

Address at the Dedication of a World War Memorial, St. Louis, Mo.
You and I join here with the rest of the Nation in dedicating this site as a memorial to the valiant dead of the World War. Here will rise a fitting structure—a symbol of devoted patriotism and unselfish service.
We in America do not build monuments to war. We do not build monuments to conquest. We build monuments to commemorate the spirit of sacrifice in war—reminders of our desire for peace.
The memory of those whom the War called to the beyond urges us to consecrate the best that is in us to the service of country in times of peace. We best honor the memory of those dead by striving for peace, that the terror of the days of war will be with us no more. In what we have done during the last three years to promote national recovery at home, to extend the hand of the good neighbor to the Nations of the world, to break down the barriers to commerce which divide Nation from Nation, we are promoting the course of peace throughout the world.
Here at home is the call to service too.
Inequalities in our social order call for correction. A true patriotism urges us to build an even more substantial America where the good things of life may be shared by more of us, where the social injustices will not be encouraged to flourish. The many different occupations in our economic and social order can and must be tied more closely together for their mutual advantage and for the advantage of America.
It is significant that the site of this memorial to the veterans of the World War is also the site of the beginning of the old Oregon trail. Here those pioneers of old left to begin that long trek across an unknown country. They faced the dangers ahead of them with stout heart and determined mind. They carried the civilization of their day to new outposts. They carried the spirit of America to a broader destiny.
We seek to follow their example along another trail. They turned not back. Let us not turn back in what we seek in these years, for our goal is a sounder and more permanent well-being in America.
We honor them and we will carry on.
May the beauty of the monument which is rising on this site cast a beneficent light on the memories of our comrades, may its substantial structure typify the strength of their purpose, and may it inspire future generations with the desire to be of service to their fellows and their country.
All major wars have brought about major disturbances in our social and economic machinery. The late War has been no exception. New problems arise to take the places of the old. We rejoice here that these problems are being met and solved without impairing our faith and confidence in the people's ability to do it themselves by the peaceful processes of democratic representative Government.
No place could be more fitting to reaffirm that faith and confidence than a monument to those who have died in a gallant effort to save democracy for the world. No place could be more fitting to renew our resolve that that faith will guide us and direct these our efforts of today. May we keep the faith.