Franklin D. Roosevelt
October 12, 1939

Request for Cooperation and Coordination of War Relief Agencies.
THE CONGRESS has provided in the Act with regard to neutrality that, subject to such rules and regulations as the President shall prescribe, funds may be solicited in this country to be used for medical aid and assistance and for food and clothing to relieve human suffering resulting from war. With a view to safeguarding the public and national interests the Secretary of State, acting in my behalf, has issued appropriate regulations to which all persons or agencies raising funds for relief, except the American Red Cross, shall be subject.
While we, as a Nation, are neutral in the present tragic war in Europe, I am sure we cannot be indifferent to the suffering inflicted upon the peoples of the war-torn countries, particularly upon the helpless women and children. It is traditional that the American people should wish, after providing in full measure for the support of our necessary charitable endeavors at home, to extend material aid to the helpless victims of war abroad.
In disasters at home or great emergencies abroad we naturally turn to the American Red Cross, which has been chartered by Congress as our national relief agency and which represents all of our people, both in war and in peace. We know from its remarkable record of service to humanity both at home and abroad that we can rely upon it to do its part as promptly and efficiently as conditions and its resources make possible.
Through its relationship to the International Red Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies, the American Red Cross has developed procedures of cooperation in the field of foreign relief. Since the beginning of the present European war it has been answering the most urgent appeals for aid, meeting the costs from contributions and its normal funds. It is now consulting with other Red Cross bodies and investigating as to how best to deal with some of the practical difficulties in order to formulate a coordinated program and thus to meet our share of relief as the needs develop.
With the continuance of war, human suffering will become more appalling and there will no doubt be need for relief work in addition to that which comes within the scope of Red Cross policy and responsibility. Groups desiring to carry on various kinds of relief work have in fact registered with the Secretary of State as required by regulations issued pursuant to the Neutrality Act. It is my hope that in their activities these groups will supplement and not conflict with the work of agencies already established and that there will be a complete coordination of effort of all voluntary relief in order to prevent duplication and confusion, avoid waste and promote the utmost efficiency.