Franklin D. Roosevelt
September 23, 1944

Request for a Study on Methods to Aid Veterans Who Wish to Engage in Farming.
It as been reliably estimated that more than a million members of our armed forces have indicated their intention to reestablish themselves in civilian life as farmers and ranchers. Their sacrifice and courage entitle them to expect this Nation to be prepared, within the limits of its capacities, to offer them reasonable opportunities to get started in agriculture.
This is not a light responsibility for the Nation to discharge for we do not possess within our borders a great new and unsettled Oklahoma or Northwest territory to be declared open for settlement by these men and their families.
Congress, by the recent adoption of the Servicemen's Readjustment Act, has shown its specific interest in aiding veterans who want to live on the land. Full advantage must be taken of the provisions of this Act and of other legislation in order that the maximum number of veterans who desire to do so may find successful careers in agriculture.
It seems highly desirable that a thorough canvass of this problem be made very soon, and you are requested jointly to make such a canvass and furnish me with a report and your recommendations at an early date.
Some of the servicemen who have indicated a desire to become farmers or ranchers may not be actually equipped by experience or education to take over a full-size farming operation. Therefore, it is important that a part of your inquiry be focused on means for fully apprising these veterans of the factors involved in operating a farm, and for making more certain that those who start to farm may continue with reasonable assurance of success. Perhaps some veterans with insufficient training might be directed to seek temporary employment for farm training with a capable farmer. Certainly, many of the veterans interested in farming can use some additional training and education in modern farming practices and techniques.
Your inquiry might also deal with the adaptation of special types of farms to the abilities of veterans whose capacities have become limited as a result of war injuries. Adequate credit upon reasonable terms must be assured. Further, it will not do merely to see that the veteran settles on some piece of land. The lands for a veteran should constitute an economically sound farm or ranch from which he can earn a sufficient income to keep his family in comfort and health, educate his children, and integrate himself and his family into the community as happy and useful citizens.
These points are, of course, only some of the more important phases of this study and of the objectives which I hope it will accomplish.