Franklin D. Roosevelt
September 29, 1944

Statement on Argentina.
I have been following closely and with increasing concern the development of the Argentine situation in recent months. This situation presents the extraordinary paradox Of the growth of Nazi-Fascist influence and the increasing application of Nazi-Fascist methods in a country of this hemisphere, at the very time that those forces of oppression and aggression are drawing ever closer to the hour of final defeat and judgment in Europe and elsewhere in the world. The paradox is accentuated by the fact, of which we are all quite aware, that the vast majority of the people of Argentina have remained steadfast in their faith in their own free, democratic traditions and in their support of the Nations and peoples who have been making such great sacrifices in the fight against the Nazis and Fascists. This was made clear beyond all doubt by the great spontaneous demonstration of public feeling in Argentina after word was received of the liberation of Paris.
The policy of the Government of the United States toward Argentina as that policy has been developed in consultation with the other American Republics, has been clearly set forth by Secretary Hull. There is no need for me to restate it now.
The Argentine Government has repudiated solemn inter-American obligations on the basis of which the Nations of this hemisphere developed a system of defense to meet the challenge of Axis aggression.
Unless we now demonstrate a capacity to develop a tradition of respect for such obligations among civilized Nations, there can be little hope for a system of international security, theoretically created to maintain principles for which our peoples are today sacrificing to the limit of their resources, both human and material.
In this connection I subscribe wholeheartedly to the words of Prime Minister Churchill in the House of Commons on August second when he declared that:
"This is not like some small wars in the past where all could be forgotten and forgiven. Nations must be judged by the part they play. Not only belligerents but neutrals will find that their position in the world cannot remain entirely unaffected by the part that they have chosen to play in the crisis of the war."
I have considered it important to make this statement of the position of the Government of the United States at this time because it has come to my attention that the Nazi radio beamed to Latin America, the pro-Nazi press in Argentina, as well as a few irresponsible individuals and groups in this and certain other Republics, seek to undermine the position of the American Republics and our associates among the United Nations by fabricating and circulating the vicious rumor that our counsels are divided on the course of our policy toward Argentina.