Barack Obama
March 30, 2010

Letter to Congressional Leaders Transmitting a Report Related to Afghanistan and Pakistan
Dear ________:
In response to the requirement of section 1117 of the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2009, and in order to keep the Congress fully informed, I am providing the attached report related to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
My Administration completed a thorough policy review last November, and I announced a new approach at West Point on December 1, 2009. As with the development of that policy, we have continued to consult closely with the Congress on the implementation of this new approach. We are now implementing this policy and do not believe further adjustments are required at this time. Consistent with the statute and given the time necessary to accumulate data, the attached report covers the period ending December 31, 2009. To the extent possible, the report provides an update on our assessment since that date.
As the Congress begins consideration of the supplemental, I underscore our Nation's interests in the successful implementation of this policy.
Sincerely,
BARACK OBAMA
Note: Identical letters were sent to Daniel K. Inouye, chairman, and W. Thad Cochran, ranking member, Senate Committee on Appropriations; Carl Levin, chairman, and John S. McCain III, ranking member, Senate Committee on Armed Services; John F. Kerry, chairman, and Richard G. Lugar, ranking member, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations; Joseph I. Lieberman, chairman, and Susan M. Collins, ranking member, Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs; Dianne Feinstein, chairman, and Christopher S. "Kit" Bond, ranking member, Senate Committee on Intelligence; Patrick J. Leahy, chairman, and Jefferson B. Sessions III, ranking member, Senate Committee on the Judiciary; David R. Obey, chairman, and Jerry Lewis, ranking member, House Committee on Appropriations; Isaac N. "Ike" Skelton IV, chairman, and Howard P. "Buck" McKeon, ranking member, House Committee on Armed Services; Howard L. Berman, chairman, and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, ranking member, House Committee on Foreign Affairs; Bennie G. Thompson, chairman, House Committee on Homeland Security; Mark E. Souder, ranking member, House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Border, Maritime and Global Counterterrorism; John Conyers, Jr., chairman, and Lamar S. Smith, ranking member, House Committee on the Judiciary; and Silvestre Reyes, chairman, and Peter Hoekstra, ranking member, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. This letter was released by the Office of the Press Secretary on March 31.