Gerald R. Ford
August 20, 1974

Remarks at a News Conference for Vice President-designate Rockefeller.
Good morning.
I think all of you have probably heard by now that my nominee for Vice President is Governor Nelson Rockefeller. I told him I was going to bring him over to all of my friends to have some discussion, and so if you would like, I just want to reiterate the fact that I stated, that after I looked at all of the choices, and they were difficult, after I looked at all of the people, there were many, but the one that in good judgment under all of the circumstances was Nelson Rockefeller.
I think he will make a great teammate. I think he will be good for the country, I think he will be good for the world, and I am looking forward to working with him.
So, Nelson.
Note: The President spoke at 10:20 a.m. in the Briefing Room at the White House. His remarks and Vice President-designate Rockefeller's news conference were broadcast live on radio and television.
Following the President's remarks, Vice President designate Rockefeller made an opening statement and participated in a question-and-answer session with reporters. His opening statement follows:
Well, needless to say, ladies and gentlemen, I am deeply honored, and should I be confirmed by. the Congress, I will look forward to the privilege and honor of serving the President of the United States and, as I said in the other room, through him all of the people of this great country.
I am fully cognizant of the fact that the responsibilities of the Vice President are to preside over the Senate of the United States and to otherwise simply carry out any assignment that he or she may receive from the President.
I will look forward to that opportunity of serving him in any way that can be useful to him, and I think and feel very strongly that already his own dedication and openness has reawakened hope and faith and that under his leadership, we as a people and we as a nation have the capacity, the will, and the ability to face the tough realities--and overcome them--that exist in our country and in the world today. And I am optimistic about the long-term future.