Gerald R. Ford
August 03, 1975

Remarks Upon Signing the Joint Communique and Trade Documents in Sinaia, Romania.
Mr. President and distinguished guests:
Let me say with great emphasis my appreciation for your warm hospitality and that of the Romanian people. It has been a wonderful experience for Mrs. Ford and myself to meet so many of your people, and it has been a glorious opportunity for me to not only see Bucharest but this superb area of your country where we are today.
I am especially grateful for the opportunity to have friendly, constructive, and frank discussions with you, not only on our bilateral relations but those problems that we see on a worldwide basis.
For the last several years, Mr. President, you have taken the leadership in bringing about an exchange in the area of culture, scientific matters, economic problems between your country and our country, and the net result has been mutually beneficial to both.
The documents that we have just signed make possible the kind of trade relationship between your country and mine that will enhance the prosperity of both, make the life of your people and mine richer, and will be beneficial on a worldwide basis.
What I have signed on behalf of my country has received the endorsement of our Government--the executive, the legislative--and therefore, it is a true contract between your country and my country for all of the benefits that we can share equally.

I thank you again, and I thank the Romanian people.
Note: The President spoke at approximately 1:15 p.m. at a ceremony following their meeting at Peles Castle. In addition to the joint communique, President Ceausescu and President Ford signed and exchanged notices of acceptance of the U.S.-Romanian trade agreement.
President Ceausescu spoke in Romanian. His remarks were translated by an interpreter as follows:
Mr. President, gentlemen, and comrades:
I should like to express my satisfaction in connection with the signing of our communique on the results of the visit paid to Romania by you, sir, and on the discussions we had together as an expression of our mutual wish to extend our cooperation in all fields and to work together more closely in order to promote the policy of peace and international cooperation.
At the same time, we signed the documents whereby the two countries take note of the fact that their trade agreement has come into effect and have exchanged ratification instruments to that effect.
As a result, a better legal framework is being created for further expanding economic cooperation between our two countries.
I should like to express my satisfaction, the satisfaction of my Government, and of the Romanian people, with the fact that the relations between Romania and the United States have now been established on a mutually beneficial basis, that our two countries are now desirous to apply in the economic field the principles of mutual advantage through the mutual granting of the most-favored-nations treatment.
During these 2 days, we had talks on many problems which pertained to the relations between the two countries and also to a number of international matters which are today of general concern to mankind and which are of interest today to our two countries as well.
I am glad to note that in these conversations of ours that the occupation and the common desire have emerged to find political solutions for the complex problems now confronting mankind and to insure the continued course towards detente, cooperation, and peace in the world.
That is why I should like to emphasize with great satisfaction that your visit to Romania, sir, although a short one, is now being concluded with the most favorable results, both with regard to the relations between Romania and the United States and the future prospects of these relations, as well as with respect to the need to take further action together in the service of peace and cooperation, in the service of building a world with more justice, a better world on our planet.
This setting in the mountains, I think, has also helped create a favorable climate, and I hope this will be reflected in the continued cooperation between our two countries and between the two of us,
I wish an ever better and better and fruitful cooperation between Romania and the United States. I wish that we can work together and to the good of our two peoples and of the cause of peace.