Gerald R. Ford
February 10, 1976

Remarks Upon Presenting the Presidential Medal of Freedom to David K. E. Bruce.
Mr. Secretary, Mr. Secretary General, Ambassador Bruce:
This is one of the nicest opportunities I have to recognize one of our foremost, if not our foremost, present-day diplomats in David Bruce. I was looking over the record. Five Presidents have recognized 139 individuals with a Medal of Freedom for outstanding, exemplary, dedicated service on behalf of the United States.
But this happens to be the first Medal of Freedom (I have) given with added distinction. All of you, or many of you, know David Bruce's long, long career, which I did not know, starting in the Virginia Legislature, as I recall--or was it the Maryland Legislature? I was half right.
But I think that shows his versatility when you can be elected to the State legislature both from Virginia and Maryland. And if you look at the record going back a good many years, you see he has been called upon by many, many Presidents to do many vitally important, very crucial jobs. And although he is leaving his present job in NATO, I suggested to him that he leave his telephone number, because as we face problems from time to time, I am certain now that someone with that prestige, that ability, that experience, and that dedication can still be used most effectively on behalf of our country.
So, I would call upon Terry O'Donnell to please read the citation, which will lay out most appropriately the justification for this very, very high honor.
Note: The President spoke at 3:40 p.m. at a ceremony in the Cabinet Room at the White House. In his opening remarks, he referred to Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and Joseph M. A. H. Luns, Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Terrence O'Donnell, Aide to the President, read the citation.
Ambassador Bruce was U.S. Permanent Representative on the NATO Council. His response to the President's remarks is printed in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents (vol. 12, p. 176).