Gerald R. Ford
January 18, 1977

Letter to the Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate Retransmitting the United States-Turkey Defense Cooperation Agreement
I AM transmitting herewith draft legislation, "To authorize the President to implement an Agreement with the Government of the Republic of Turkey relative to Defense Cooperation pursuant to Article III of the North Atlantic Treaty in order to resist armed attack in the North Atlantic Treaty Area."
This is identical to the draft legislation which I transmitted to the 94th Congress on June 16, 1976. Because the 94th Congress adjourned sine die without acting on this matter, I am retransmitting the draft legislation and sectional analysis thereof which accompanied my June 16 message. At that time, I urged early and favorable consideration by the Congress in order to give new strength and stability to U.S.-Turkish security cooperation, which has served not only the interests of our nation but has buttressed NATO's southeastern flank for more than two decades. Like the 1969 Agreement which it replaces, the new Agreement authorizes U.S. participation in defense measures in Turkey related to obligations of both parties under the North Atlantic Treaty. The purpose of the Agreement and its key provisions are described in my June 16 message.
Turkey needs substantial amounts of outside assistance to continue essential modernization of its armed forces to meet increased Warsaw Pact armed forces capabilities. It clearly continues to be in the U.S. interest to provide such assistance. This Agreement restores U.S. assistance to levels comparable in real dollar terms to what we have been providing Turkey over the past 30 years.
Close security ties with Turkey are in the interest of the United States. Such ties strengthen Turkey's contribution to NATO and to the stability of the eastern Mediterranean area. Approval and implementation of the new Agreement will restore an atmosphere of trust and confidence between the United States and Turkey and thereby contribute to our efforts to encourage peaceful settlement of long-standing regional issues.

I urge prompt Congressional approval of this legislation.

Sincerely,
GERALD R. FORD
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the Honorable Nelson A. Rockefeller, President of the Senate.