Gerald R. Ford
June 23, 1975

Letter to Congressional Committee Chairmen Transmitting Reports on the Status of Indochina Refugees and Retrieval of Indochina Assistance Funds
Dear Mr. Chairman:
The Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1975 requires that I transmit within thirty days after its enactment a report to six committees of the Congress describing the status of refugees from Cambodia and South Vietnam.
In response to that requirement, I am forwarding a report prepared by the acting Director of the interagency task force for Indochina. It sets forth current progress in receiving and resettling the refugees.
Progress to date has been good when considered in the context of the magnitude of the refugee situation--the large numbers and great distances--and the short period of time available to deal with it. The cooperation and sacrifices made by private individuals and organizations, by Members of the Congress, by Federal, State and local officials, and by military personnel have been exemplary. I compliment all of them, and I ask that as many more people as possible contribute their efforts toward complete resettlement.

I am also transmitting a report regarding retrieval of assistance funds to Cambodia and South Vietnam by the Department of Defense and the Agency for International Development as required by section 4(b) (3) of the Act.
I anticipate that the subsequent supplementary reports required by the Act will provide the committees additional information on these activities.

Sincerely,
GERALD R. FORD
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable James O. Eastland, Chairman, Senate Committee on the Judiciary; the Honorable Peter W. Rodino, Chairman, House Committee on the Judiciary; the Honorable John J. Sparkman, Chairman, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations; the Honorable Thomas E. Morgan, Chairman, House Committee on International Relations; the Honorable John L. McClellan, Chairman, Senate Committee on Appropriations; and the Honorable George H. Mahon, Chairman, House Committee on Appropriations.
The reports are entitled:
"Report to the Congress--Interagency Task Force on Indochina Refugees, June 15, 1975."
"Report Required by Section 4(b)(3) of the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1975."