Gerald R. Ford
November 13, 1974

Remarks on Signing the WIN Consumer Pledge.
BEFORE SIGNING, I would like to read a statement that has been prepared:
Mrs. Ford and I are signing today the first consumer pledge prepared for Americans by the nonpartisan Citizens' ]Action] Committee to Fight Inflation.
The WIN committee is asking mayors and principal county officials across this country to set up local action committees for distribution in the near future of similar pledges for citizens to sign in a concerted mass effort to stop inflation. The committee has also prepared a businessman and businesswoman's pledge and a worker's pledge for local distribution. Each Governor is being asked to establish one statewide committee to determine ways and means to slow inflation and to save energy in each State.
If all Americans will pull together to hold down prices, to buy wisely, to increase productivity, and to save energy, this citizens' mobilization to slow inflation can and will work. Inflation is sapping the economic strength of this country, and it must be brought under control.
So, at this point Betty will sign the first pledge, and I will join her.

REPORTER. Mr. President, what are you going to do to carry out this plan?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the things that I buy, I will be very careful in purchasing. I think we have got to increase our productivity--that includes me. We have to be Yankee traders when we buy, and we have to cooperate individually and collectively. And Mrs. Ford has pledged to me, as well as here, she will do the same.
Note: The President spoke at 1:13 p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. The texts of the WIN pledges follow:
Consumers:
I pledge to my fellow citizens that I will buy, when possible, only those products and services priced at or below present levels. I also promise to conserve energy and I urge others to sign this pledge.
Businessmen and Businesswomen:
I pledge to my customers that to the very best of my ability I will hold or reduce prices and will buy whenever possible from those who have pledged to do the same. I also pledge to be an energy saver. This signed pledge is evidence of my participation in, and support of, the WIN Program.
Workers:
I pledge that I--through my union--will join with my fellow workers and my employer in seeking ways to conserve energy and eliminate waste on the job. I also promise to urge others to sign this pledge.