Abraham Lincoln
May 14, 1862

Messages to Congress Recommending Naval Officers for Thanks
To the Senate and House of Representatives:
The third section of the "Act further to promote the efficiency of the Navy," approved 21st of December, 1861, provides--
That the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall have the authority to detail from the retired list of the Navy for the command of squadrons and single ships such officers as he may believe that the good of the service requires to be thus placed in command; and such officers may, if upon the recommendation of the President of the United States they shall receive a vote of thanks of Congress for their services and gallantry in action against an enemy, be restored to the active list, and not otherwise.
In conformity with this law, Captain David G. Farragut was nominated to the Senate for continuance as the flag-officer in command of the squadron which recently rendered such important service to the Union by his successful operations on the Lower Mississippi and capture of New Orleans.
Believing that no occasion could arise which would more fully correspond with the intention of the law or be more pregnant with happy influence as an example, I cordially recommend that Captain D. G. Farragut receive a vote of thanks of Congress for his services and gallantry displayed in the capture since 21st December, 1861, of Forts Jackson and St. Philip, city of New Orleans, and the destruction of various rebel gunboats, rams, etc.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN.

To the Senate and House of Representatives:
I submit herewith a list of naval officers who commanded vessels engaged in the recent brilliant operations of the squadron commanded by Flag-Officer Farragut, which led to the capture of Forts Jackson and St. Philip, city of New Orleans, and the destruction of rebel gunboats, rams, etc., in April, 1862. For their services and gallantry on those occasions I cordially recommend that they should by name receive a vote of thanks of Congress.
LIST.
Captain Theodorus Bailey.

Captain Henry W. Morris.

Captain Thomas T. Craven.

Commander Henry H. Bell.

Commander Samuel Phillips Lee.

Commander Samuel Swartwout.

Commander Melancton Smith.

Commander Charles Stewart Boggs.

Commander John De Camp.

Commander James Alden.

Commander David D. Porter.

Commander Richard Wainwright.

Commander William B. Kenshaw.

Lieutenant Commanding Abram D. Harrell.

Lieutenant Commanding Edward Donaldson.

Lieutenant Commanding George H. Preble.

Lieutenant Commanding Edward T. Nichols.

Lieutenant Commanding Jonathan M. Wainwright,

Lieutenant Commanding John Guest.

Lieutenant Commanding Charles H. B. Caldwell.

Lieutenant Commanding Napoleon B. Harrison.

Lieutenant Commanding Albert N. Smith.

Lieutenant Commanding Pierce Crosby.

Lieutenant Commanding George M. Ransom.

Lieutenant Commanding Watson Smith.

Lieutenant Commanding John H. Russell.

Lieutenant Commanding Walter W. Queen.

Lieutenant Commanding K. Randolph Breese.

Acting Lieutenant Commanding Selim E. Woodworth.

Acting Lieutenant Commanding Charles H. Baldwin.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN.