Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 30, 1956

Statement by the President Upon Signing Bill Providing Improved Career Incentives for Medical and Dental Officers.
I HAVE TODAY approved H. R. 9428 to provide for the procurement of medical and dental officers of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Public Health Service, and for other purposes.
This legislation is one of the major items in the Administration's legislative program for improving military career incentives. Under it, medical and dental officers of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Public Health Service will receive increased special pay as follows: Those having 2 to 6 years service will receive an additional $50.00 per month; those having 6 to 10 years service will receive an additional $ 100.00 per month; and those having more than 10 years service will receive an additional $150.00 per month. The legislation also provides for constructive service credits for pay and longevity purposes to compensate for the extensive training which medical officers must undertake before starting on their professional careers.
I am informed that good progress is being made on the other major Administration recommendations designed to stop the wasteful losses from our armed forces and attract individuals to those services. I look forward to having the legislation embodying these recommendations presented to me at an early date. This includes legislation to remove existing inequities and inconsistencies in veterans' and survivors' benefits, legislation to provide medical care for all dependents of military personnel, legislation to improve the conditions of service of nurses, legislation to increase the regular officer strength of the armed forces, legislation to provide adequate housing for military personnel and their families, and legislation to continue existing authority to retire commissioned officers of the Army and Air Force in currently held temporary grades.
All of these measures are essential to the well-being of our military personnel and to personnel stability in our armed forces.
Note: As enacted, H. R. 9428 is Public Law 497, 84th Congress (70 Stat. 119).