Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 10, 1954

Citation Accompanying Medal of Honor Presented to Benjamin F. Wilson.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress March 3, 1863 has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
FIRST LIEUTENANT (THEN MASTER SERGEANT)

BENJAMIN F. WILSON, UNITED STATES ARMY
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty in action with the enemy:
Lieutenant Wilson, Infantry, United States Army, a member of Company 1, 31st Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division, distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and indomitable courage above and beyond the call of duty in action against the enemy near Hwach'onMyon, Korea, on 5 June 1951. Company I was committed to attack and secure commanding terrain stubbornly defended by a numerically superior hostile force emplaced in well-fortified positions. When the spearheading element was pinned down by withering hostile fire, he dashed forward and, firing his rifle and throwing grenades, neutralized the position denying the advance and killed four enemy soldiers manning submachine guns. After the assault platoon moved up, occupied the position and a base of fire was established, he led a bayonet attack which reduced the objective and killed approximately twenty-seven hostile soldiers. While friendly forces were consolidating the newly-won gain, the enemy launched a counterattack and Lieutenant Wilson, realizing the imminent threat of being overrun, made a determined lone-man charge, killing seven and wounding two of the enemy, and routing the remainder in disorder. After the position was organized, he led an assault carrying to approximately fifteen yards of the final objective, when enemy fire halted the advance. He ordered the platoon to withdraw and, although painfully wounded in this action, remained to provide covering fire. During an ensuing counterattack, the commanding officer and first platoon leader became casualties. Unhesitatingly, Lieutenant Wilson charged the enemy ranks and fought valiantly, killing three enemy soldiers with his rifle before it was wrested from his hands, and annihilating four others with his entrenching tool. His courageous delaying action enabled his comrades to reorganize and effect an orderly withdrawal. While directing evacuation of the wounded, he suffered a second wound, but elected to remain on the position until assured that all of the men had reached safety. Lieutenant Wilson's sustained valor and intrepid actions reflect utmost credit upon himself and uphold the honored traditions of the military service.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The President presented the medal to Lieutenant Wilson at Lowry Air Force Base at 11:30 a.m. on September 7, 1954, in the presence of relatives and friends.