Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 26, 1954

Recorded Interview by Mrs. John G. Lee, National President, League of Women Voters.
THE PRESIDENT. Ladies of the League of Women Voters: As you know, circumstances prevented me from accepting your invitation to address you. Because of this, your President, Mrs. Lee, has suggested that she ask me two or three questions of interest to the League, and that I answer them, our conversation to be recorded. This I am delighted to do. She is in my office now. Mrs. Lee.
Mrs. Lee: Mr. President, the League of Women Voters urges all citizens to work in the party of their choice and to be willing to assume the responsibilities of public office. Do you think that women have a useful contribution to make in this regard?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, most certainly I do. After all, I am told that 52 percent of the vote on the Republican side in the national election a year and a half ago was cast by women. I am biased, of course, but I think they then made a very useful contribution.
So far as the responsibilities of public office are concerned, my position is made clear, I think, by the number of women I have appointed to key posts in the Federal Government. There were 34 in the first year. The more women of the same caliber we have in Government the better off we will be.
Mrs. Lee: Mr. President, the League of Women Voters believes the main focus of United States foreign policy should be, first, to strengthen cooperatively the economies of the free nations, and second, to build our defenses into a workable system of collective security within the framework of the United Nations whenever possible. Would you comment on the individual's role in the achievement of these ends?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, American foreign policy must be founded on America's understanding of her relationships to the rest of the world, arrived at through widespread study of relevant fact. The results of this study are expressed in a sound public opinion, which is of course the real power in a free system. Thus America becomes essentially unified in support of applicable foreign policy, and only when based on such unity can any foreign policy be successful. Every individual American within the limits of his ability and influence can add something to the building of a sound public opinion, to the unity of America.
An organization such as the League of Women Voters can multiply the contribution of its individual members by fostering programs and discussion groups that help a community to learn the facts of existence in the world of 1954. In addition to unity at home, we must have mutual understanding among the free peoples. All of us, whether we live in Maine or Kansas or Texas, in Ceylon or Iceland or Turkey, must come to recognize that basically we are all moved by the same human aspirations, the same general purposes, the same determination to live our lives in freedom according to the dictates of conscience, the same desire for a just and lasting peace.
Again, every individual, and particularly an organization such as yours, can help increase international understanding. Every time we refuse to be stampeded by a prejudice, every time we correct a falsehood, we are doing something for understanding of others by ourselves. Every time we help others to learn the truth about America, we move that much closer to international understanding.
Mrs. Lee: Mr. President, in our opinion the United States has an important stake in the expansion of world trade. Could you tell us what you consider to be the primary considerations in this matter with which the citizens should be concerned?
THE PRESIDENT. The first consideration, I think, should be the enlightened self-interest of the United States. When a problem in world trade arises, and a solution is proposed, I think we should apply to it this question: does this solution, regardless of all else, increase the overall strength of our country, or enhance its influence, or strengthen its position of leadership? If there is a net gain to America in the proposed solution, we should reject all counsel that is rooted in prejudice or in the belief that we can get along without the rest of the world.
The second consideration, I think, should be the reduction of the manmade barriers between the free nations. The more closely we are joined with the other free nations of the world, the greater is our own national security in this generation. Very few Americans, in my opinion, would today urge that we abandon all our alliances, and all our friendships, and retreat into continental isolationism. But we can wall ourselves off in isolation by a stubborn refusal to promote the freest possible trade with others that is consonant with the stability of our own economy.
The third consideration concerns our ultimate goal of a cooperative peace in the world. A principal avenue to cooperation between peoples is trade that is mutually advantageous. The Yankee clipper ships of a century ago were outstanding ambassadors of goodwill for our country. Their modern counterparts on the ocean lanes and the airways of the world can be effective builders of a cooperative peace. The hungry, the disease-ridden, the impoverished, are easily moved by threats and promises and propaganda. Through trade we create opportunities for raising standards of living in other countries, and we win friends who are dependable, we make the world more stable. Only a stable world can be a truly peaceful world.
Mrs. Lee: Thank you, Mr. President. We of the League of Women Voters deeply appreciate your courtesy in taking time out during a very busy day to talk with us.