Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 03, 1956

Letter to Dr. Howard L. Bevis Appointing Him Chairman of the National Committee for the Development of Scientists and Engineers.
Dear Dr. Bevis:
For the last several years there has been a growing awareness within the Government and among private citizens in general that as a result of our continuing shortages of highly qualified scientists and engineers we are running the danger of losing the position of technological pre-eminence we have long held in the world.
Because of my own concern with this situation, I established some time ago a special inter-departmental committee to make an intensive study of the situation. This committee has now made recommendations to me on actions which might appropriately be taken by the Federal Government to improve our relative position.
At the same time, the special committee pointed out that the problem of increasing our supply of qualified scientists and engineers cannot be solved by Government alone. The committee wisely recognized that the problem required for its solution the powerful and concerted action of citizens and citizens' groups organized to act effectively.
As its major recommendations, therefore, the special committee urged that I establish a National Committee for the Development of Scientists and Engineers. They proposed that this be an action group, representative of major citizens organizations concerned with the education, training and utilization of scientific and engineering personnel. This group would consider ways of fostering the further development of scientists and engineers and would in all appropriate ways take action to promote a substantial growth in the supply of scientific and technological manpower.
I have accepted the recommendation of the special committee and I am establishing the National Committee which has been proposed. It is my hope that the Committee will:
1. Assist the Federal Government in identifying the problems associated with the development of more highly qualified scientists and engineers.
2. Enlist the cooperation of all interested individuals and groups in analyzing the problem and developing programs to deal with it, and to take the lead in coordination of interested organizations outside the Federal Government.
3. Make available to all interested organizations information on effective ways of overcoming the obstacles to the training of more qualified scientists and engineers.
4. Publicize the problem and possible solutions in order to stimulate widespread public understanding and support.
5. Provide me, from time to time, with a report of progress.
It gives me a great deal of satisfaction to appoint you Chairman of this Committee. Under your leadership, I am convinced that this group can make a major and timely contribution to the economic and social welfare of the nation and to the national security as well.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER