Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 29, 1954

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 2 of 1954 Relating to the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1954, prepared in accordance with the Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended. The reorganization plan assigns to appropriate agencies the liquidation of certain affairs of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
First, the reorganization plan transfers to the Export-Import Bank of Washington loans made to foreign financial institutions and to foreign governments, including a loan to the Republic of the Philippines; all foreign bonds and securities acquired in the liquidation of Corporation lending programs; and functions with respect to the liquidation of those assets. The Bank is this Government's principal instrument for the administration of similar matters and can readily integrate the liquidation of the transferred assets with its other activities in the field of foreign finance.
Second, the reorganization plan transfers to the Small Business Administration loans made by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to victims of floods or other catastrophes, together with the function of liquidating those loans. The Small Business Administration is responsible for a similar loan program. Thus, by this transfer, related activities are concentrated in a single agency for effective administration.
Third, the reorganization plan transfers to the Federal National Mortgage Association, in the Housing and Home Finance Agency real estate mortgages made or acquired under the authority of the RFC Mortgage Company and the Defense Homes Corporation, and the function of liquidating these assets. The Association is responsible under its basic authority for the servicing, liquidation, and sale of the bulk of residential real estate mortgages held by the Government of the United States. Through its field offices, the Association maintains continuous relationships with lending and investing institutions specializing in home financing. It is, therefore, the Federal agency best situated to liquidate the assets of a similar type transferred to it by the reorganization plan.
Under existing authority, the completion of the liquidation of the assets and the winding up of the affairs of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation will be carried out under the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury after the succession of the Corporation expires on June 30, 1954. The reorganization plan modifies that arrangement by placing responsibility for the completion of each of the activities described above under the jurisdiction of an agency responsible for a similar continuing program. Thus, the reorganization plan facilitates the orderly and expeditious liquidation of the affairs of the Corporation.
It is not, however, practicable at this time to specify the reductions of expenditures which it is probable will be brought about by the taking effect of the reorganizations contained in the plan.
After investigation, I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1954 is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2 (a) of the Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended.
I urge that the Congress allow the reorganization plan to become effective.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Reorganization Plan 2 of 1954 is published in the U.S. Statutes at Large (68 Stat. 1280) and in the 1954 Supplement to title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (p. 102). It became effective on July 1, 1954.