Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 30, 1955

Remarks at the Cornerstone-Laying Ceremony for the American Federation of Labor Building.
President Meany, ladies and gentlemen:
I take it as right neighborly that you, President Meany, and your associates should ask me to come across from the other side of Lafayette Square, where I have a temporary leasehold, to visit you on this historic occasion at the place which we hope will be your permanent home for many, many years to come.
I came for a number of reasons, among which were an opportunity again to salute that great and vast army of Americans who with their hands produce our material wealth; to return friendly calls that have been made to my office by leaders of the labor movement; and likewise because I read this in the letter of President Meany asking me to be here.
He said, "We have constantly observed the principle of placing our responsibilities as American citizens above our obligations and duties as members of labor unions."
So far as I am concerned that is the philosophy that should guide the American of every calling, no matter what it is--to place the long-term good of America, all America, above any immediate and selfish reason. And in that spirit, I salute this group of leaders and every single individual that belongs to the labor movement, and indeed all labor in America.
President Meany, in his address, adverted to the previous occasion of the laying of a cornerstone for the American Federation of Labor, and he spoke of President Wilson being here. President Wilson said, among other things, on that occasion: "If you come at me with your fist doubled up, you will find that I will double mine no less swiftly than you do yours. But if you come to me in the spirit of friendliness and negotiation, you will find that I will say, 'Come let us sit down together and there, I assure you, we shall find that our differences are far more imaginary than real.'"
Now again I believe that on that occasion, Mr. Wilson spoke something that all Americans should well heed. Because we shall never be rid of strife in this world--international and, in some degree among ourselves, so long as humans are human and the millennium has not arrived. But the character of men and the character of nations will be determined by the method in which they meet to solve their differences. If we acknowledge that the difference is honestly agreed, then let us meet in what we like to term the Christian spirit and reach an answer that is for the good of all. It seems to me that Mr. Wilson spoke something that was worthy then of the great man, Samuel Gompers, who as your President, was worthy of the entire movement that we call the American labor movement.
For myself, I should like to tell you again, I am no stranger to work. Mr. Meany referred to a terrible 60-hour week. I reminded him several times that when I finally was fortunate enough to enter the Army, my workweek just before that was 84 hours, and it was 52 weeks a year. I certainly can appreciate what the labor movement has done for the men and women of America and what we must continue to do to make certain that this growing and advancing prosperity is widely shared so that all may participate in it.
Finally, President Meany made a pledge. And he used the words of Samuel Gompers in a great pledge to President Wilson.
In return, I can say only this: so far as the Almighty will give to this administration and to me personally the ability to discern the proper tasks, we shall do nothing but devote our efforts to try to lead this world--this Nation of ours--toward enduring peace, toward a better prosperity and equal justice for all here at home.
Now in conclusion, may I say I am not only pleased, I am very proud that this great assembly--this great association--soon to become greater by its junction with another great organization, will by that measure have still greater responsibilities in carrying out the kind of pledges that have been made by your leaders of the past, and I am sure are earnestly followed by your leaders at this moment.
I am proud to be here, and to participate in this ceremony.

Thank you all very much.
Note: The President's opening words "President Meany" referred to George Meany, President of the American Federation of Labor.
The pledge made by Samuel Gompers, first President of the AFL, at the dedication of the headquarters on July 4, 1916, and repeated by Mr. Meany, follows:
"Let us do all that we can to help the man at the head of the affairs of our country, the President of the United States, to see to it that we are kept out of actual war with any Nation. Be true to yourselves, true to each other, true to the organized labor movement, true to the institutions and the flag of our country, which we shall uphold at all times and against all obstacles no matter from which quarter they may come."