Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 01, 1959

Letter to Meade Alcorn, Chairman of the Republican National Committee, Concerning His Resignation.
Dear Meade:

Your decision to resign as Chairman of the Republican National Committee causes me great regret, as I know it will the vast number of Republicans with whom you have worked closely during the twenty-six months of your stewardship. The zeal with which you have devoted yourself to the work of the Party has been an inspiration to all those who are fostering Republican ideals at every level of government.
You have been an outstanding spokesman for our Party, and have represented it forthrightly and with honor throughout the length and breadth of the land. The program which you have recently initiated to build for the future will, I confidently expect, be a major milestone in Republican history.
Particularly heartening to me has been your constant emphasis upon the role of youth. On the vision and the vigor that they bring to the councils of our Party depends significantly the ability of Republicans, as a political entity, to contribute through future decades to the shaping of sound and effective governmental policies. I am confident that in their achievements to come, you will see frequent and satisfying reflections of your own dedicated efforts.
Although you will soon be relinquishing your official responsibilities as Chairman, I know there will be many calls on you for further assistance, and I hope to see you often as you visit here.

With gratitude for your fine services, and warm personal regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
P.S. Not long ago I saw a copy of the Resolution of thanks for your services adopted by the National Committee at its meeting in Des Moines. I agree with every word the Committee had to say; the Resolution expresses the affection, admiration and respect in which the rank and file of the Republican Party hold you.
Note: Mr. Alcorn served as chairman of the Republican National Committee from February 1, 1957, to April 11, 1959. His letter was released with the President's reply.