Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 25, 1957

Statement by the President Regarding Congressional Inquiry Into Corrupt Practices and Abuses of Trust in Certain Labor Unions.
THE ADMINISTRATION has followed with intense interest the efforts of the Senate Select Committee to bring to light disclosures of corrupt practices and abuses of trust by officers and members of some labor unions.
Corruption on the part of a few should not obscure the fact that the vast majority of those connected with organized labor are decent and honest Americans and that responsible labor leadership is moving speedily toward protecting their members from any such abuses, as far as their means permit. The American labor movement must be free to pursue efforts to achieve social and economic gains which in the past have benefitted the Nation as a whole.
Labor racketeering, like corruption anywhere, is an abomination which must be eliminated if and whenever it occurs. Any officer and employee of labor--and it appears there have been few--who abuse the power and trust imposed upon them are not fit to hold union offices. The American working man and woman deserve from labor leadership high standards of trust and fidelity.
This high regard for the rights and welfare of the individual worker is the concern and aim of this Administration. We seek not only to protect the individual worker in his person and in his aspirations, but in the interest he has in his union funds and dues and in the security of his welfare and pension plans.
In the area of union welfare and pension plans, the Administration has, since 1954, repeatedly made specific legislative recommendations for the registration, reporting and disclosure of these plans. This legislation, I earnestly believe, should be enacted as speedily as possible.
In dealing with other situations in which the right of individual workmen or of the public may be endangered, each must be studied carefully to determine what remedies are necessary and whether they best lie in voluntary action, better law enforcement, administrative action or appropriate Federal or State legislation, or in a combination of these means.
I have discussed this matter with Secretary of Labor James P. Mitchell, and have asked him to determine what actions may be required of the Administration to protect the interests of the individual working man. We are prepared to take all actions including appropriate legislative recommendations that appear to be necessary. Secretary Mitchell will coordinate the activities within the Administration relating to this problem.
Note: This statement was released at Augusta, Ga.