Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 04, 1960

Exchange of Telegrams Between the President and President Garcia on the Philippine Sugar Quota.
[ Released April 4, 1960. Dated March 30, 1960 ]
Dear Mr. President:
I have received your telegram of March 17 asking that I increase the Philippine sugar quota. As you know, the sugar quotas are determined by Congress and any modification would require Congressional action. Since the Sugar Act of 1948, as amended in 1956, expires this year, Congress is expected to consider its extension during the present session.
The Administration has been giving considerable thought to what recommendations it should make to Congress for its consideration. After weeks of most careful study of this problem, I have concluded that the time is not propitious to recommend any change in the present structure of quotas assigned to foreign countries.
Accordingly, I have recommended to the Congress only certain minimum changes in the present Sugar Act. The most important of these would give me the authority to reduce the quota for a calendar year for any foreign country, except, of course, the Philippines, and to make required replacements from any source when I determine it to be in the national interest or necessary to insure adequate supplies of sugar. I have requested this authority primarily to enable me to protect our sugar consumers should our supplies of sugar from foreign sources be endangered for any reason. The final decision as to whether I am to be given this authority, however, rests with Congress. I regret therefore that it has not been possible for me to comply with the wishes of the Philippine sugar producers. I wish to assure you, however, that the position of the Philippines has been given full consideration by the Administration in arriving at the position which I have recommended to Congress.
With assurances of my continued esteem,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: President Garcia's telegram follows:
President Dwight Eisenhower
The White House
On behalf of the Filipino people, particularly those in the sugar industry, may I ask Your Excellency to increase the Philippine sugar quota by any amount you deem just and fair. May I state in this connection that present production capacity can absorb two hundred thousand tons more of additional quota. Your generous action on this request will give a tremendous boost to our economy which needs further stabilization.
Assuring you of the lasting gratitude of the Filipinos and of my own, I remain
Very sincerely yours,
CARLOS P. GARCIA