Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 22, 1954

Executive Order 10529—Participation by Federal Employees in State and Local Civil Defense Pre-Emergency Training Programs
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes of the United States, including the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 1245, as amended, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. In arranging for the use of personnel of Federal departments and agencies for civil-defense purposes in time of emergency and for their coordination with State and local civil-defense plans in consonance with the provisions of section 3 of Executive Order No. 10346 of April 17, 1952, the Federal Civil Defense Administrator, after consultation with the head of a department or agency, may recommend that the services of such personnel of the said department or agency as have volunteered their services and have been selected for civil-defense assignments be made available for participation in the program of a State or of any political sub-division thereof for training, prior to an emergency, in the performance of civil-defense duties.
SEC. 2. After consideration of the recommendation of the Federal Civil Defense Administrator, the head of a Federal department or agency, or such officer as the head thereof may designate, may from year to year authorize such of the said personnel of such department or agency as he may designate to participate in pre-emergency training programs and test exercises in cooperation with any State or political sub-division thereof, and such duties shall be performed on assignment by the particular Federal department or agency, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Personnel so assigned shall at all times remain subject to the administrative jurisdiction and control of their Federal department or agency;
(b) The period of official time that may be authorized for any such assignment pursuant to this order shall not exceed a total of forty working hours for any person during a calendar year; and
(c) There shall be satisfactory evidence from State or local civil defense authorities that such personnel served or participated in such programs or exercises pursuant to specific request of a public governmental body or organization established pursuant to and in accordance with a State civil defense law.
SEC. 3. During any period or periods in which such personnel shall be engaged in said civil-defense training duties under authority of this order, they shall continue to be compensated in usual course by their Federal department or agency, and shall continue in their status as Federal employees for all purposes. Where travel is involved in connection with the performance of such training duties, travel allowances and expenses may be authorized in accordance with the Standardized Government Travel Regulations.
SEC. 4. This order shall not be construed as restricting or limiting the activities of officers or employees of the Federal Civil Defense Administration in the performance of their functions and duties.
SEC. 5. As used in this Order:
(a) The term "personnel" shall mean persons who are in a full time pay status as civilian officers or employees of the United States Government.
(b) The term "State" shall mean any of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, each of the Territories and possessions of the United States, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
April 22, 1954.