Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 25, 1959

Annual Message to the Congress Transmitting Report on U.S. Participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith, pursuant to the International Atomic Energy Agency Participation Act, the second annual report covering the United States participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency for the year 1958.
During 1958 the Agency, in addition to making major strides toward completing its organizational and staff structure, achieved a significant though modest amount of progress in establishing its substantive program of bringing the benefits of the peaceful uses of atomic energy to the peoples of its members.
In particular, increasing attention was given to the needs of the less developed countries. This involved development of the Agency's fellowship and training program and its information and technical assistance activities. Such programs are designed to meet the more basic needs of the less developed members for highly trained specialists, for knowledge of the latest developments in the various fields involved in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and for an understanding of the needs and resources of such members for the establishment of meaningful national programs in this field.
The Agency also began to make a significant contribution with respect to the more technical aspects of the peaceful uses of atomic energy-particularly in the fields of radioisotopes and health and safety--through a variety of activities, including publication of a Manual on Practice on the Safe Handling of Radioisotopes. A Scientific Advisory Committee was established to advise the Agency on specific scientific and technical questions arising from the Agency's program.
Considerable progress was realized in 1958 in developing dose and harmonious relations with the United Nations and other interested international bodies. Arrangements for cooperation with specialized agencies were formalized by the conclusion of relationship agreements with the International Labor Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Economic and Social Council, and the World Meteorological Organization. The Agency also was admitted to full participation in the United Nations Expanded Program of Technical Assistance.
In September the Government of Japan requested the Agency's assistance in procuring some three tons of natural uranium for Japan's first research reactor. This may well be the most important single event in the Agency's short history of striving toward fulfillment of its objectives-particularly if the positive response made by the Agency to the Japanese request should lead to the making of similar requests by other members. By the end of 1958 the Agency was making considerable progress with this request and also with the negotiation of general supply agreements with the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union--the members that had offered quantities of fissionable material to the Agency.
The United States participated fully in the work of the Agency and made major contributions to its progress in 1958. Consultants were provided for various Agency programs. Technical information was rendered. A considerable number of fellowships were provided and a substantial sum of money was given for the Agency's fellowship program. In addition, the United States contributed to the Agency's regular budget and made an advance to its working capital fund.
In these ways the United States continues to meet its pledge to make every effort to assist the Agency in achieving its high purpose.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The second annual report is printed in House Document 21 (86th Cong., 1st sess. ).