Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 26, 1960

Statement by the President Concerning Mutual Security Appropriations.
I AM gravely concerned by the Conference action on Mutual Security appropriations.
I have repeatedly stated that the appropriation of the full $4,086 million authorized is vitally needed. Moreover, needs which have developed since my original request, particularly the emergency in the Congo, have made necessary an additional $100 million for the Contingency fund.
Only day before yesterday, by a 67-26 vote, the Senate approved the additional $ 100 million and at the same time increased last month's House appropriation of $3,584 million by $297 million. The Conference, while approving the $ 100 million increase in Contingency funds, virtually disregarded the Senate restoration in the basic Mutual Security budget. It accepted only $31 million--one-tenth of the $297 million restoration that the Senate had just overwhelmingly approved.
In short, the Conference recognized the need for $ 100 million of new funds but at the same time slashed by $265 million the budget to which these new funds are to be added.
This cut would sharply curtail support indispensable to the defense of allies now under intensified Soviet pressure and deny aid urgently needed by other friendly nations struggling under the gravest difficulties to make progress in freedom.
Not only are the funds now provided by the Conference inadequate, but also a number of administrative restrictions were retained which would impair the management of the Mutual Security Program.
Surely, in the world situation now confronting our country, the Congress will not accept these recommendations which fall so short of the need.
I urge that this appropriation be returned to Conference. We must, for America, correct its deficiencies.
A Congressional rejection of this request will hamper greatly the Nation's Chief Executive who succeeds me next January. Upon him will fall the heavy responsibility of continuing to guide our country in a troubled world. He, no less than I, must have adequate funds to do the job.
Note: The President's statement was released with the letters comprising Items 271 and 272, below.
The Mutual Security and Related Agencies Appropriation Act, 1961 (Pub. Law 86-704, 74 Stat. 776), was approved September 2, 1960.