Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 29, 1956

Proclamation 3152—Modification of Restrictions on Imports Certain Virginia-Type Peanuts

Whereas, pursuant to section 22 of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as amended (7 U.S.C. 624), I issued Proclamation No. 3019 on June 8, 1953 (67 Stat. C 46), limiting to 1,709,000 pounds (aggregate quantity) the imports of peanuts, whether shelled, not shelled, blanched, salted, prepared, or preserved (including roasted peanuts, but not including peanut butter) which may be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption in any 12-month period beginning July 1 in any year, which proclamation was amended by Proclamation No. 3025 of June 30, 1953 (67 Stat. C 54) and by Proclamation No. 3095 of May 16, 1955 (69 Stat. C 32);
Whereasthe said Proclamation No. 3095 amended the said Proclamation No. 3019 so as to establish thereafter as the quota year for peanuts the 12-month period beginning August 1 in any year;
Whereasthe total quantity of such peanuts which may be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption under the said Proclamation No. 3019, as amended, during the 12-month period beginning August 1, 1956, has already been entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption;
Whereas, pursuant to section 22 (d) of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as amended, the United States Tariff Commission has made a supplemental investigation to determine whether there is a deficit in the domestic supply of Virginia-type peanuts, shelled (not including peanuts blanched, salted, prepared, or preserved), of sizes averaging in representative samples not more than 40 kernels per ounce, such as to require an increase in the quantity of such peanuts which may be permitted to be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption during the early part of the quota year beginning August 1, 1956, to meet essential requirements of domestic users of such peanuts, and, if so, what additional quantity or quantities of such peanuts may be permitted to be so entered or withdrawn without materially interfering with or rendering ineffective the program of the Department of Agriculture with respect to peanuts;
Whereasthe United States Tariff Commission has submitted to me a report of its findings and recommendation in connection with the said supplemental investigation; and
Whereas, on the basis of said supplemental investigation and report of the Tariff Commission, I find that the domestic supply of Virginia-type peanuts is not sufficient to meet the essential requirements of domestic users of such peanuts and that such deficit may be permitted to be supplied from peanuts of foreign origin, but only under the conditions and subject to the fee hereinafter proclaimed, without rendering or tending to render ineffective, or materially interfering with, the said program of the Department of Agriculture with respect to peanuts, or reducing substantially the amount of any product processed in the United States from peanuts with respect to which such program is being undertaken:
Now, Therefore, I, Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, acting under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by the said section 22 of the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as amended, do hereby proclaim that the said Proclamation No. 3019, as amended, is hereby modified so as to permit an unlimited quantity of peanuts of the Virginia type, shelled (not including peanuts blanched, salted, prepared, or preserved), of sizes averaging in representative samples not more than 40 kernels per ounce, to be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption during the period beginning on the day following the date of this proclamation and ending at the close of business on 10 September 1956, subject to a fee of 7 cents per pound, but not more than 50 per centum ad valorem: Provided, That the said fee shall be in addition to any other duties imposed on the importation of such peanuts.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this 29th day of August in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-first.


DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
By the President:

JOHN FOSTER DULLES,

Secretary of State