Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 08, 1957

Citation and Remarks at Presentation of the Distinguished Service Medal to Admiral Arthur W. Radford.
[ Text read by Captain E. P. Aurand, Naval Aide to the President ]
THE PRESIDENT of the United States takes pleasure in presenting the Distinguished Service Medal (Gold Star in lieu of a Fourth Award) to
ADMIRAL ARTHUR W. RADFORD,
UNITED STATES NAVY
for service as set forth in the following
CITATION:
For exceptionally meritorious service to the Government of the United States in a duty of great responsibility. As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 15 August 1953 to 15 August 1957, Admiral Radford carried out the grave responsibilities of his office in an exemplary manner. Throughout his Chairmanship he exhibited a singular professional knowledge and understanding of the many aspects of national strength, of the international situation, and of the capabilities and requirements of all branches of the Armed Forces. His sound judgments and decisions were of eminent significance, both nationally and internationally. His keen thinking and considered military advice to the President, the National Security Council and the Secretary of Defense had great influence on the military posture of our country and of our allies. The integrity, loyalty, modesty, and ability with which Admiral Radford discharged his difficult responsibilities for the security of the United States have been an inspiration to all who have labored with him to improve the defenses of Freedom. By his selfless dedication, he has rendered service of the highest value to the Nation, and has reflected great credit upon himself and our Armed Forces.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
[ Remarks of the President ]
Admiral Radford, it is a very great honor and privilege to participate in this ceremony which is merely to present to you a token of the appreciation of your government for your services. It is also with very great regret that we now say goodbye to you officially, but we hope you will be around when we can talk to you personally.
My very deep thanks for all you have done.
Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden. Admiral Radford replied: "I have thoroughly enjoyed my four years with your team, Mr. President, and I leave with great regret."