Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 06, 1955

Exchange of Letters Between the President and Chancellor Adenauer of Germany on the Geneva Conference.
[Released August 6, 1955. Dated August 1, 1955]
Dear Mr. Chancellor:
I was most happy to receive your letter of July twenty-fifth, expressing satisfaction with the results of the recent Geneva Conference. I particularly appreciate what you said about my contribution to those results. At the same time, I am fully aware that progress at Geneva would not have been possible without that unity of peaceful purpose among the Western Allies which you, Mr. Chancellor, have done so much to establish.
We must now look forward to a period of arduous and continuing negotiation in the effort to achieve the aims of peace and justice for all men in an atmosphere which will permit the growth of freedom. As you know, I consider that the reunification of your country is of first importance in the process of establishing foundations for a lasting peace. I agree fully with your view that the maintenance of Western unity is vital to the ultimate achievement of these objectives and welcome your assurances of cooperation toward this end on the part of the German Federal Government.

With assurances of my high esteem and personal regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Chancellor Adenauer's letter, dated July 25, follows:
Dear Mr. President:
On this day I should like particularly to tell you how strongly I am impressed by the united bearing of the western powers during the negotiations of the past week. I know, dear Mr. President, what a great part you played in this, for which I should like to express to you my sincere thanks.
I believe that you can look back on the results of the four power conference of the past week with much satisfaction. The discussions have without doubt clarified the positions of both sides. The door is opened to further negotiations. The west can approach these negotiations with closed ranks. It is especially valuable that agreement with the Soviets was successfully reached upon a common agenda, which provides a useful basis, in the western interests, for the future negotiations.
I feel that we should be quite clear that only by maintaining the united attitude of the west will we succeed in bringing the Soviets to a reasonable solution of the large problems which affect us all in equal manner. On the way to this end, which will be long, wearisome, and full of risks, close cooperation is required on the part of everyone of good will.
I may say to you that you can fully rely in this matter upon the attitude of the German Federal Government.
With friendly greetings and best wishes,
Sincerely yours,
ADENAUER