Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 07, 1959

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Bayar.
PRESIDENT EISENHOWER visited Turkey on December 6 through December 7, 1959. The sincere rejoicing of the Turkish Nation and the outstanding reception extended to President Eisenhower and to his party during this brief but meaningful visit reaffirmed in the most impressive way the existing strong friendship and close cooperation between the Governments and peoples of Turkey and the United States. The visit demonstrated anew the desire of both countries to continue this fruitful cooperation in their mutual interest as well as in that of the community of free nations to which they both belong.
In the course of this visit talks were held at President Bayar's residence on Sunday evening between the two Presidents with the participation of Prime Minister Menderes and Foreign Minister Zorlu, Under Secretary of State Murphy, Secretary General Esenbel and Ambassador Warren.
During the talks a full and friendly exchange took place on a wide range of problems of common interest.
The alliance and partnership of Turkey and the United States within the defense organization of NATO and active association in CENTO, together with their common participation in the actions of the United Nations for the preservation of peace, influenced the nature and the scope of the talks. Turkish cooperation in the United Nations Command, Korea, was recalled in this connection.
On the vital question of the creation of an atmosphere that would lead to establishment of a true detente in the whole world, the two Presidents agreed that such a detente, in order to be effective, should be based on justice and equality and provided with the essential safeguards. Since it is not possible to divide the many problems at present separating East and West into separate compartments, they recognized that detente like peace had to be considered as an indivisible entity. It was understood that an efficient, controlled system of disarmament is necessary.
In the course of the discussions particular attention was paid to existing areas of tension and danger throughout the world. President Bayar and President Eisenhower jointly expressed strong conviction that at this point in history the future of humanity depended above all on the degree of solidarity in thought and action which the free nations can master in meeting their common problems. They agreed that cooperation and continuing consultation between the two countries both on a bilateral basis and within NATO and CENTO were paramount.
President Bayar expressed his sincere appreciation of the admirable efforts made by President Eisenhower in order to reduce international tensions and both Presidents voiced the hope that these efforts would bear fruit for the benefit of the whole world. Particular attention was paid to the question of subversive activities in the Middle East and the situation was appraised in the light of an eventual atmosphere of detente.
Economic aspects of the Turkish-American relations, as well as the broader problem of the assistance to underdeveloped countries, were considered. President Bayar stressed the importance of securing a sufficient raising of the living standard of the Turkish people in order to enable Turkey to assume adequately the responsibilities which her geographic position imposes upon her. He outlined the economic progress achieved in the last ten years in Turkey and expressed appreciation for the generous assistance given by the American people to Turkey.
President Eisenhower expressed his appreciation of the economic and social goals met by the Turkish Nation. He expressed confidence that the United States will continue to support, in concert with other friends and allies, the economic development and security efforts of Turkey. He expressed his belief that such efforts would be successful.
The two Presidents recognized that improvement in the standard of living of the less developed countries is a necessary ingredient to the achievement of peace and security in the world. They expressed the view that coordinated action is desirable and that any aid extended would prove most effective when providing and receiving countries were united through a dedication to common goals.
The economic collaboration realized after the war constitutes a remarkable example in the field of economic assistance. The hope was expressed as well that European efforts in this field could be directed to the assistance of the less developed areas of the European continent, like Turkey.
The initiative of Turkey to be an associate member of the European Common Market was also examined and the hope was expressed that such association would foster solidarity among these countries.
In concluding their talk the two Presidents reiterated their dedication to the ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. They expressed their determination to marshal all their efforts to the attainment of a lasting peace embracing full security and justice for all.
Note: This joint statement was released in Ankara.