Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 15, 1959

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Prime Minister Karamanlis.
ON THE occasion of his official visit to Greece on the fourteenth and fifteenth of December, the President of the United States Mr. Dwight Eisenhower concluded talks with the Prime Minister of Greece Mr. Constantine Karamanlis. Present at the talks were the American Ambassador, Mr. Ellis O. Briggs, and the Under Secretary of State Mr. Robert Murphy, and on the Greek side the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Panayotis Kanellopoulos, and the Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Constantine Tsatsos.
The President expressed his warm appreciation of the hospitality extended by Their Majesties King Paul and Queen Frederika, and of all the Greek people.
The talks covered a wide range of general and specific topics of common interest to both countries.
Both countries affirmed their faith in the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and their staunch support of the objectives of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization which based on the solidarity of its members, aim at the firm establishment of security, and at peace with justice. The relaxation of world tensions was discussed in this spirit.
The Greek Prime Minister expressed his deep appreciation for the great endeavor for peace undertaken by President Eisenhower. Both agreed that the consolidation of world peace must be pursued in such a way as to guarantee the independence of all nations and the freedom of the individual.
Historic instances in which both countries stood side by side in hard struggles were recalled, and in this context the importance of Greece in the common defense effort was recognized.
Opinions were exchanged concerning those parts of the world of particular interest to Greece. Careful account was taken of her special position in the Balkans and the general situation in this area as well as in the Eastern Mediterranean, was examined. It was agreed that the two governments should exchange views on matters of mutual concern involving these areas. The prospective emergence of an independent Cyprus State was hailed with special satisfaction.
The Greek Prime Minister expressed the gratitude of the Greek people for the enduring interest and help being extended by the American people. He also explained to the President the problems the country faces in seeking to raise the standard of living of the Greek people and maintaining the obligations and responsibilities of its position in the defense structure of the Free World.
President Eisenhower, recognizing the special economic and social conditions of Greece, expressed his admiration for the improvement being accomplished by the country and reaffirmed the interest of the American people in the security and economic development of Greece.
Generally it was recognized that improvement in the standard of living in the economically less developed countries constitutes a vital element in the consolidation of international peace.
The conversations were held in an atmosphere of deep sincerity and warm cordiality such as have traditionally characterized the relations of the two countries, and which were so happily confirmed by the visit to Greece of the President of the United States.
Note: This joint statement was released in Athens.
The President took leave of Their Majesties at the royal palace. Prime Minister Karamanlis accompanied him to the stadium for departure by helicopter for the U.S.S. Des Moines, the flagship of the Sixth Fleet. The President spent 2 days aboard the Des Moines en route to Tunisia.