Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 05, 1959

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Gronchi.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States, assisted by Ambassador Murphy, the President of the Italian Republic and the President of the Council of Ministers of the Italian Republic, assisted by Minister of Foreign Affairs Pella, concluded on December 5 a two-day series of meetings which were held both at the Quirinal Palace and the Viminal Palace. The conversations were animated by friendship, respect and understanding. They covered a wide range of international topics in which both Italy and the United States are interested.
The meetings were conducted in the clear knowledge that Italy's increasing contribution to the elaboration of a common Western policy is in the interest of the Western countries.
President Eisenhower and President Gronchi discussed plans for their respective visits to the Soviet Union next year. They agreed that these visits are being undertaken in the hope that they will advance the cause of peace and contribute to the search for solutions to outstanding international problems.
Both parties declared that the Noah Atlantic Alliance remains the cornerstone of their foreign policies. They found themselves in full agreement with regard to the vital role which the North Atlantic Alliance must continue to play.
They confirmed the firm belief that the way to world peace lies through full application of the principles set forth in the United Nations Charter and expressed the dedication of their two countries, to the United Nations.
They exchanged views regarding appropriate ways and means to accelerate the economic growth of the less developed countries of the world with the purpose of increasing the combined economic strength of the free world and the well-being of all peoples. They agreed that increased free world participation in assistance to the less developed areas is necessary and that this participation should be coordinated among the free nations.
The participants expressed their determination to pursue policies aimed at reducing the burden of armaments throughout the world. The two Governments also expressed their determination to do all in their power to insure that the ten nation disarmament group, of which both Italy and the United States are members, will lay the groundwork for an acceptable solution to the problem of disarmament, which can only be achieved within the framework of a specific system of controls, inspections and safeguards.
They reviewed developments related to the European Economic Community. They noted the substantial progress which is being achieved in carrying out the Rome treaty and in increasing political and economic unity among the member states of the Community. They were agreed on the continuing importance of these objectives and the need for the Community to evolve policies in order to promote the collaboration with other similar associations and other countries, and also to contribute to the goal of freer, expanded world trade.
President Segni informed President Eisenhower of the measures being taken by the Italian Government to further liberalize trade with the dollar area. President Eisenhower noted this action with satisfaction.
The two Presidents and the Prime Minister considered efforts which are being made through GATT and other appropriate bodies to remove obstacles to world trade. They agreed that further measures should be taken to eliminate discriminatory trade restrictions.
This series of meetings constituted an important step in the progress toward the realization of the ideals of peace, security, justice and social progress which form the basis of all the policies of the two countries.
Note: This joint statement was released in Rome.