Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 31, 1959

Letter to Admiral Jerauld Wright on His Release From the Position of Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic.
[ Released December 31, 1959. Dated December 29, 1959 ]
Dear Jerry:
The North Atlantic Council has approved my request that you be released from the position of Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, effective February 29, 1960, in order that you might retire from active duty in the United States Navy on the following day. At the same time, the Council approved my nomination of Admiral Robert L. Dennison to succeed you in this important post.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my personal thanks and that of the American people for the services which you have performed over a period of the last six years. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization represents an endeavor on the part of fifteen free nations, the success of which is vital to the security and well-being of the United States. Thus, the position of Commander of one of the major commands of this organization is one of the greatest responsibility. The leadership and judgment which you have displayed in this capacity have been a source of deep satisfaction to me personally, and I know has won the great admiration not only of the nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization but of all the Free World. Your loss will be felt by all.
At the same time, I do, of course, take note of the fact of your forthcoming retirement from the United States Navy. As you leave, you take with you the gratitude of the people of the United States for your many years of outstanding and devoted service and my very best wishes to you and Phyllis for a happy and rewarding retirement.
With warm regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This letter was released at Augusta, Ga.
A White House release of December 23 stated that the North Atlantic Council had expressed to Admiral Wright, in the name of the governments represented on the Council, lasting gratitude for the distinguished service rendered by him as Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, a position in which he served from April 12, 1954, through February 29, 1960.