Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 08, 1959

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Ayub Khan.
ON THE morning of December 8, 1959, the President of Pakistan and the President of the United States, with advisors of both Governments, met to discuss matters of common interest. These discussions continued at lunch and the two Presidents have had other opportunities to exchange views.
Both Presidents warmly welcomed the opportunity afforded by President Eisenhower's visit to have these talks, which were held in an atmosphere of cordiality and frankness characterizing relations between the two allied nations.
They reviewed generally world-wide political questions, and in particular problems of relations between the Free World and the Sino-Soviet bloc. They were in full agreement as to the essentiality of cooperation among members of the family of free nations in the interest of their mutual security.
They discussed relationships among the nations of the area and the urgent desirability of finding solutions to existing disputes. In this way the energies of the peoples and governments may be directed more fully toward constructive programs adding to stability and progress, and a greater degree of cooperation among them may be achieved.
They reaffirmed their satisfaction with the increasingly close cooperation between Pakistan and the United States. Relations between the countries are based upon mutual respect and friendship, resting on the firm determination of both to work together for the achievement of the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
They emphasized anew the importance of CENTO and SEATO in preserving the stability and security of the areas covered by them. They reiterated the determination of the two Governments to continue strongly to support these regional collective security organizations in accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
They recognized the heavy financial burden placed upon Pakistan in its efforts to undertake substantial development projects and at the same time to maintain armed forces consonant with its national security. They reviewed various elements of technical, economic and military aid which is extended to Pakistan by the United States as part of the two nations' mutual assistance which contributes to the security of both.
They reiterated their conviction that the Free World's best interests require closer cooperation in order to advance economic growth and development. They reviewed with gratification the progress being made in Pakistan in this connection, and the President of the United States expressed in particular to President Ayub his admiration for the remarkable achievements in Pakistan toward the resettlement of those elements of the population which have been inadequately housed.
The President of Pakistan explained steps taken by his Government during the past year to strengthen the country. He outlined the "basic democracies plan" and progress toward a new constitution. The President of the United States stated that his Government was following Pakistan's venture with genuine interest.
The two Presidents expressed their belief that the visit had led to an even closer understanding between Pakistan and the United States, had strengthened the strong ties already existing between the two countries, and had underlined the need of continued cooperative programs between them.
Note: This joint statement was released in Karachi.