Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 17, 1957

Remarks at SHAPE Headquarters, Paris.
General Norstad and My Friends:
It had not occurred to me when I had decided to make this visit to SHAPE that so many people would be inconvenienced--the Guarde Mobile and the Police, to say nothing of the photographers and the reporters, because frankly I came out here because of a special kind of sickness, one that afflicts the aged and the young--homesickness.
I was homesick to see this home that was built for SACEUR and his staff, an agency of NATO. This home was built by a great number of nations to be the headquarters of that military shield that must always belong to NATO so long as there is any menace to the freedom of the western nations.
And on that day I recall was the last time that, in France, I was ever privileged to wear my uniform. I shortly became a civilian. And even today I must tell you that I have the feeling about civilians that a sergeant of George Patton's had. This sergeant one day was trying to tell something about the faults of the soldiers in one of the squads that he had, and he was telling the general that they weren't any good. And finally he said, "In fact, they're no good." "But," he said, "I will make one exception." He said, "We have one corporal if he had about twelve years service would make a pretty good private first class." "Well," the general said, "I don't think they are that bad, sergeant." He said, "Listen, general, the rest of these people, they ain't 'fittin' to be civilians."
Now I must acknowledge that there is certain of that feeling in my heart today. After forty years of wearing a uniform, it would be strange if I felt still quite as natural with my civilian hat as I did with my military cap. But I want to indulge, for just a moment, this feeling of homesickness, the fun of going and seeing some of the people of SHAPE, not because they are the same ones, because there's only a few left here of five more years or so, but they are the same ones carrying the same mission, doing the same job that all of us here started in 1951 I believe it was.
So, to all of you greetings, good wishes, good luck, and I hope that your homes are warm and nice, and the kids are in good health and everything is going fine with all of you--with all of SHAPE--from whatever nation you are.
Good luck. Thank you. Goodbye.
Note: The President spoke at SHAPE headquarters, Paris, at 11:06 a. m. His opening words "General Norstad" referred to General Lauris Norstad, Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in Europe.