Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 18, 1959

Remarks at the Dock Upon Arrival in Toulon.
Monsieur Jacquinot, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Again I am privileged to visit this lovely country of France. Again I have the honor of meeting so many of her citizens.
France and America--the United States of America--have been allies over many years, under many different circumstances. France first came to our aid in 1777, when we were struggling so hard for our independence. Since that time there has existed between our peoples, and certainly on our part, a great sense of obligation to the great French nation.
In the vicissitudes and circumstances of international life, not always has everything been clear sailing, but the underlying affection and respect of the two nations each for the other has never lessened. And because of that, we are stronger today--this nation under the leadership of General de Gaulle and our own nation--we are stronger for the pursuit of peace than possibly we have ever been in our history. We are part of a great coalition that is determined, from a position of strength, to pursue peace with every bit of strength, with every bit of wisdom and certainly with every bit of heartfelt emotion that we possibly can. And in my opinion, if all of us can struggle together in the same way that the United States and France have during these past many decades, we shall, one day, win through to success.
Thank you again, sir, for coming as a personal representative of General de Gaulle to greet me as I put my foot again on this lovely soil of this lovely country. Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 1:25 p.m. He was greeted by Louis Jacquinot, French Minister of State and personal representative of President de Gaulle, and by Admiral Henri Nomy and Ambassador Herve Alphand. Secretary of State Christian A. Herter joined the President at Toulon and accompanied him by train to Paris, where they were met by President de Gaulle and Amory Houghton, U.S. Ambassador to France. Ambassador Houghton escorted the President to the U.S. Embassy where the President stayed during the Western summit meeting.