Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 28, 1958

Statement by the President Making Public the Science Advisory Committee's Report "Strengthening American Science."
MORE THAN a year ago a many-pronged effort was launched to underwrite the strength of American science and technology as one of our essential resources for national security and welfare. At that time I asked my Science Advisory Committee to make a study of ways in which the federal Government could best serve this objective.
The Committee has recently presented its report on "Strengthening American Science" to the Cabinet. I believe it is of such importance and timeliness that it should be given broad distribution.
One of the specific recommendations of the report calls for the establishment of a new federal Council for Science and Technology, a body to promote closer cooperation among federal agencies in planning their programs in science and technology. I have approved the establishment of this new Council and have asked that the appropriate Executive Order be prepared for bringing it into existence without delay. It is my hope that this new Council will improve the planning and management of Government research programs and will facilitate the resolution of common problems and promote greater interagency cooperation.
In making public this report, I call particular attention to the conclusion of the Science Advisory Committee that the task of further strengthening United States science is so broad that Government, industry, universities, foundations, and individuals all have essential roles to play. The future growth and strength of American science will depend upon the efforts of all of these parts of our national community if we are to rise to the demands of our times.
Note: Mimeographed copies of the Committee's report (22 pages) were released with the President's statement. In addition the White House released a 4-page press statement concerning the report.
Noting that federal funds currently pay for about half of the scientific research, engineering, and development in the United States, the report surveys the role of the federal Government in the light of present problems and opportunities in the field. It includes the following recommendations: (1) establishment of a federal Council for Science and Technology; (2) a series of steps to improve the administration and management of research in Government laboratories; (3) critical examination of policies and practices covering Government-sponsored research in non-Government institutions; (4) steps to emphasize the importance of planning to meet the capital needs of science, and (5) reaffirmation of the importance of private support of research together with suggestions to foundations and other private sources of funds.
Earlier, on December 7, the White House announced that the President, acting upon the recommendations of the Science Advisory Committee, directed the National Science foundation to take the lead in bringing about effective coordination of the various scientific information activities within the federal Government. The Committee's recommendations were contained in a report entitled "Improving the Availability of Scientific and Technical Information in the United States," released by the White House the same date.