Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 30, 1960

Letter Accepting Resignation of Leo A. Hoegh as Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization.
[ Released December 30, 1960. Dated December 29, 1960 ]
Dear Leo:
Through your efforts as Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, our Nation has taken great strides in building a strong non-military deterrent to war. As I accept your resignation, effective January 20, 1961, I assure you of the Nation's debt to you for your personal contribution.
I was particularly pleased to note in your report that the National Shelter Policy, issued in May 1958, has already resulted in the construction of over one million family fallout shelters, that, under the National Plan for Civil Defense and Defense Mobilization, all states and 2500 county and city governments have completed Survival Plans, and that 38 states now have adopted continuity of government measures. Today, OCDM officers could, in the event of dire emergency, warn all states and hundreds of local areas within 15 seconds after an attack is detected. More than half the Nation's high schools have received radiological instruments for instruction; more than 25,000 leaders have received training at the OCDM Staff College; 20 million Americans have received written instruction on fallout shelters. These are some of the outstanding achievements for which you deserve the grateful thanks of the Nation.
I deeply appreciate the work you have done to alert every American to the importance of this vital part of our total security. You have my very best wishes as you return to private life. May the future hold much health and happiness.
With warm regard,
Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Mr. Hoegh served as Administrator of the Federal Civil Defense Administration from July 19, 1957, to July 1, 1958, at which time he was appointed Director of the Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization (redesignated Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization on August 26, 1958). His letter of resignation and report were released with the President's reply.