Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 01, 1959

Letter Accepting Resignation of Neil H. McElroy as Secretary of Defense.
[ Released December 1, 1959. Dated November 30, 1959 ]
Dear Neil:
As I regretfully accept your resignation as Secretary of Defense, to be effective December first in keeping with your request, I wish to express my deep appreciation of your distinguished service these past two years.
Well I know that the responsibilities of members of the Cabinet are heavy and unrelenting; and I especially appreciate, with respect to the office you have so admirably filled, the extraordinary burdens imposed by its responsibility for day-to-day management of the huge national security complex encompassed by the Department of Defense. In recent years particularly, the tasks of reorganizing and modernizing our forces--always difficult at best have had to be so met that we could confidently press our quest for a just peace from a foundation of sure strength at home.
What you have contributed personally to the solution of these and of a multitude of other pressing problems and to the general administration of defense affairs has been invaluable. I am indeed sorry that personal considerations compel your departure from the government at this time, but I am thankful that you leave to your successor a Department that will continue to reflect the very beneficial changes effected under your energetic leadership.
I am deeply grateful for the strong support you have consistently afforded not only to me but also to other Administration officials, and I shall not hesitate to call upon you as occasion may offer in the future. You know, I trust, that you take with you the lasting thanks of your governmental associates, the appreciation of the American people, and my own good wishes for continued success.
With warm personal regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Mr. McElroy, served as Secretary of Defense from October 9, 1957, to December 1, 1959. His letter of November 27 was released with the President's reply.