Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 14, 1957

Remarks Upon Arrival in Paris for the NATO Meetings.
President Coty, the President of the Council, My Dear Friends of France:
After an absence of more than five years, once again I step on the soil of France. At this moment I am stirred and inspired by the memories of the great personalities and dramatic events of French history. From the beginning of America's national existence, France has had a large and special place in the affections of my countrymen.
Wisdom, gallantry, and honor have enriched and embellished France's success in war and peace. And, through faith and greatness of heart, she has always emerged from every test, no matter how stern, a brilliant and strong leader of Western culture and civilization.
Of all the many great days of France, the one that lives brightest in my heart, and will remain forever indelible in my life, was that August day in 1944, when, after four long years, Paris again knew freedom and the joy that freedom brings.
That day is now more than thirteen years in France's past. The record of France's accomplishment since the liberation of Paris is signalized by her visible progress in culture, in art and in productivity. Above all else, it is signalized by her indestructible sense of destiny, and her readiness to meet the present and the future.
Today we live in one of those periods of test not only for France but all of France's friends and allies, my country among them. It is for us, together, to determine whether men shall continue to live in freedom and in dignity or whether they are to become mere vassals of an all-powerful state.
France was one of the first to have the imagination and courage and wisdom which led to the founding of the defensive shield we know as NATO. She recognized that only in true partnership could the free nations develop and maintain the spiritual, economic and military strength needed to neutralize the continuing threat from the East.
The heads of NATO are meeting in this beautiful Paris to consider new elements in the challenge we now face. We shall meet it effectively. We shall meet it in unity.
We shall be striving not only to strengthen the NATO shield, but we shall also address ourselves to other aspects of our alliance. We all are confident that in the supreme strength of balanced unity we can move together toward security and peace.
In these days of trial, it is good not only to think seriously, but to think gallantly, to think in faith.
So, I salute once more all the people of France. I bring my personal greetings to my French friends--tested and true friends who have been my comrades in war and in peace. I have for them, and for all France, that profound feeling of gratitude that comes from sharing with them the crises of war, the problems of peace.
All nations have their own great words, their great mottoes; words that are timeless and a symbol of a nation's destiny. As we begin our NATO deliberations tomorrow, I shall be thinking of France's greatest words--
Liberty, Equality, and Brotherhood.
They have as much meaning today as they had at the founding of the Republic.
These three words could fittingly be emblazoned on the shield of NATO. For it is the liberty of all of us that NATO is pledged to defend. It is a pledge made among equals. It is a pledge made in the spirit of that true brotherhood which sealed an alliance unique in history.
That alliance forever seeks the security of each of its nations, and of all the free world. Above all, it seeks peace--peace with justice and with honor.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at the Orly Airport upon his arrival there at 3:10 p.m., Paris time. His opening words "President Gory" and "the President of the Council" referred to Rene Gory, President of the Republic of France, and PAUL HENRI Spaak, Secretary General of NATO, who served as President of the NATO Council in Paris.