Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 22, 1956

Executive Order 10693—Creating an Emergency Board To Investigate Disputes Between the Akron & Barberton Belt Railroad and Other Carriers and Certain of Their Employees
WHEREAS disputes exist between the Akron & Barberton Belt Railroad and other carriers represented by the Eastern, Western and Southeastern Carriers' Conference Committees, designated in list attached hereto and made a part hereof, and certain of their employees represented by the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen, a labor organization; and
WHEREAS these disputes have not heretofore been adjusted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended; and
WHEREAS these disputes, in the judgment of the National Mediation Board, threaten substantially to interrupt interstate commerce to a degree such as to deprive the country of essential transportation service:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 10 of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 U.S.C. 160), I hereby create a board of three members, to be appointed by me, to investigate the said disputes. No member of the said board shall be pecuniarily or otherwise interested in any organization of employees or any carrier.
The board shall report its findings to the President with respect to the said disputes within thirty days from the date of this order.
As provided by section 10 of the Railway Labor Act, as amended, from this date and for thirty days after the board has made its report to the President, no change, except by agreement, shall be made by the Akron & Barberton Belt Railroad Company and other carriers represented by the Eastern, Western and Southeastern Carriers' Conference Committees or their employees in the conditions out of which the said disputes arose.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 22, 1956.
EASTERN RAILROADS
Akron & Barberton Belt Railroad Company

Akron, Canton & Youngstown Railroad Co.

Ann Arbor Railroad Co.

Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co.

Buffalo, Rochester & Pittsburgh Territory

Buffalo and Susquehanna District

Baltimore & Ohio Chicago Terminal Railroad Co.

Curtis Bay Railroad

Staten Island Rapid Transit Railway Co.

Bessemer & Lake Erie Railroad Co.

Boston & Maine Railroad Co.

Brooklyn Eastern District Terminal

Bush Terminal Railroad

Canadian National Railways

Canadian National Lines in New England

Canadian National Railways in the State of New York

United States & Canada Railroad

Champlain & St. Lawrence Railroad

St. Clair Tunnel Company

Central Railroad Company of New Jersey

New York & Long Branch Railroad Co.

Central Vermont Railway, Inc.

Chicago Union Station Co.

Cincinnati Union Terminal Co.

Cuyahoga Valley Railway Co.

Delaware & Hudson Railroad Corp.

Delaware, Lackawanna & Western Railroad Co.

Detroit and Toledo Shore Line Railroad Co.

Detroit Terminal Railroad Co.

Detroit, Toledo & Ironton Railroad Co.

Donora Southern Railroad Co.

Erie Railroad Co.

Grand Trunk Western Railroad Co.

Hoboken Shore Railroad

Lake Terminal Railroad Co.

Lehigh & New England Railroad Co.

Lehigh Valley Railroad Co.

Long Island Railroad Co.

Maine Central Railroad Co.

Portland Terminal Co.

McKeesport Connecting Railroad Co.

Monon Railroad

Monongahela Railway Co.

Newburgh & South Shore Railway Co.

New York Central System

New York Central Railroad Co.

Eastern District (excl. Boston Division)

Boston Division

Western District

Ohio Central Division

Northern District

Southern District

L & J B & R R

Indiana Harbor Belt Railroad Co.

Chicago River & Indiana Railroad Co.

Chicago Junction Railway

Pittsburgh & Lake Erie Railroad Co.

Lake Erie & Eastern Railroad Co.

Cleveland Union Terminals Co.

New York, Chicago & St. Louis Railroad Co.

New York Dock Railway Co.

New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad Co.

New York, Susquehanna & Western Railroad Co.

Pennsylvania Railroad Co.

Baltimore & Eastern Railroad Co.

Pennsylvania-Reading Seashore Lines

Pittsburgh, Chartiers & Youghiogheny Railway Co.

Reading Company

River Terminal Railway Co.

Toledo Terminal Railroad Co.

Union Railroad Co.

Upper Merion & Plymouth Railroad Co.

Washington Terminal Company

Western Maryland Railway Co.

Youngstown & Northern Railroad Co.
WESTERN RAILROADS
Alton and Southern Railroad

Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway

The Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway

Panhandle and Santa Fe Railway

Belt Railway Co., of Chicago, The

Camas Prairie Railroad

Chicago & Eastern Illinois Railroad

Chicago & Illinois Midland Railway

Chicago and North Western Railway

Chicago and Western Indiana Railroad

Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad

Chicago, Great Western Railway

Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad

Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad

Chicago, St. Paul, Minneapolis and Omaha Railway

Colorado and Southern Railway, The

Colorado and Wyoming Railway, The

Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad, The

Des Moines Union Railway

Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railroad

Duluth Union Depot and Transfer Co.

Duluth, Winnipeg & Pacific Railway

East St. Louis Junction Railroad

Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway

Fort Worth and Denver Railway

Joint Texas Division of CRI&P Railroad & FtW&D Railway

Galveston, Houston and Henderson Railroad

Great Northern Railway

Green Bay and Western Railroad

Kewaunee, Green Bay and Western Railroad

Houston Belt & Terminal Railway

Illinois Central Railroad

Chicago and Illinois Western Railroad

Illinois Northern Railway

Illinois Terminal Railroad

Kansas City Southern Railway, The

Kansas City Terminal Railway

King Street Passenger Station (Seattle)

Litchfield and Madison Railway

Los Angeles Junction

Louisiana & Arkansas Railway

Manufacturers Railway

Midland Valley Railroad

Kansas, Oklahoma & Gulf Railway

Minneapolis & St. Louis Railway, The

Minneapolis, St. Paul & Sault Ste. Marie Railroad

Minnesota Transfer Railway, The

Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad

Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad Co. of Texas

Missouri Pacific Railroad

Missouri Pacific Railroad (Gulf District)

Missouri-Illinois Railroad

Northern Pacific Railway

Northwestern Pacific Railroad

Ogden Union Railway and Depot Co., The

Peoria and Pekin Union Railway

Port Terminal Railroad Association

St. Joseph Terminal Railroad

St. Louis-San Francisco Railway

St. Louis, San Francisco & Texas Railway

St. Louis Southwestern Railway

San Diego & Arizona Eastern Railway

Southern Pacific Co. (Pac. Lines) (Excl. Former El Paso & Southwestern System)

Southern Pacific Co. (Pac. Lines) (Former El Paso & Southwestern System)

Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway

Oregon Trunk Railway

Oregon Electric Railway

Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis

Texas and New Orleans Railroad

Texas and Pacific Railway, The

Abilene and Southern Railway

Fort Worth Belt Railway

Texas-New Mexico Railway

Texas Short Line Railway

Weatherford, Mineral Wells and Northwestern Railway

Texas Mexican Railway, The

TP-MP Terminal of New Orleans

Toledo, Peoria & Western Railroad

Union Pacific Railroad

Union Railway Co. (Memphis)

Union Terminal Co. (Dallas)

Wabash Railroad--Lines West of Detroit

Wabash Railroad--Lines East of Detroit

Western Pacific Railroad
SOUTHEASTERN RAILROADS
Atlanta & West Point

Western Railway of Alabama

Atlanta Joint Terminals

Atlantic Coast Line Railroad

Birmingham Southern Railroad

Central of Georgia Railway

Charleston & Western Carolina Railway

Chesapeake & Ohio Railway

Clinchfield Railroad

Florida East Coast Railway

(In trusteeship. Any commitment subject to court approval)

Georgia Railroad

Gulf, Mobile & Ohio Railroad

Jacksonville Terminal Company

Kentucky & Indiana Terminal Railroad

Louisville & Nashville Railroad

Nashville, Chattanooga & St. Louis Railway

Norfolk & Portsmouth Belt Line

Norfolk & Western Railway

Richmond, Fredericksburg & Potomac Railroad

Potomac Yard

Seaboard Air Line Railway Company

Southern Railway

Alabama Great Southern Railway Company

Cincinnati, New Orleans & Texas Pacific Railway

Georgia Southern & Florida Railway

Harriman & Northeastern Railroad Company

New Orleans & Northeastern Railroad

New Orleans Terminal Company

St. Johns River Terminal Company

(Includes State University R. R. and East St. Louis Terminal)

Tennessee Central Railway Company

Virginian Railway Company