Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 27, 1960

Remarks Upon Arrival at the Provincial Hotel in Mar del Plata, Argentina.
Honorable Mayor, Mr. President, citizens of the Argentine and of this lovely city, ladies and gentlemen:
Thank you for your generous welcome, and for the honor you do me in presenting me with a key to the city. I assure you I shall not misuse it. I am not privileged to be here long enough to do so.
Indeed, in recent months, I seem to travel so often, so fast, and so furiously, that I am given little opportunity to see any real estate--but I do see people. And to me, people are more important than anything else in the world.
And I must say to you that in the last few hours the people of Argentine and the people of this city have seized a warm and large spot in my heart, one that I shall cherish forever. And I assure you that whatever I can do to bring my people closer to yours, to make certain that you of your nation and we of our nation are stronger and better friends, that I shall do. However, from what I have already seen of the beautiful city of Mar del Plata, I wish I could remain longer than the few hours available to me. Even so, I shall carry with me vivid and pleasant memories of this short visit.
In Buenos Aires I was impressed by the majesty of its beauty, and by the bustling activity, and commerce, and industry. Since, however, I grew up far from my own national capital, and have lived in many parts of my country, I realize full well that the real strength of a nation lies in all its parts, not just its capital and its industrial cities.
As we flew to Mar del Plata, I was able to glimpse from the air some of your country's farmland, a few of the cattle-growing estancias, and some of the sheep-raising area. There is a native richness and even greater promise in this land. Its future is certain to be a bright one--the Argentines will make it so.
So I bring you the friendly wishes of the people of the United States, and again thank you earnestly for the warmth of your welcome, both along the streets and in this hall--and for the great honor you have done me in presenting to me this symbolic key.
Note: The President spoke at 11:55 a.m. following Mayor Todoro Bronzini's presentation of the key to the city. Earlier, upon his arrival at Camet Airport, the President was met by President Frondizi who accompanied him to the Provincial Hotel.