Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 06, 1956

Letter to Arthur B. Langlie, Chairman, the Governors' Conference, Transmitting Report of Interdepartmental Committee on Narcotics.
[Released February 6, 1956. Dated February 4, 1956]
Dear Governor Langlie :
I enclose a report which has just been completed by the Interdepartmental Committee on Narcotics, representing the Departments of State, Treasury, Defense, Justice, and Health, Education and Welfare. It is a careful study of the problem from all aspects. It can form the basis for a systematic review and improvement of various national, State and local narcotic programs.
Among its recommendations are several relating to increased activity by State and local governments, and closer cooperation with the Federal authorities and among themselves. Because of the deep, common interest of all of us in taking every practicable step to stamp out narcotics addiction, I am sending this report through you, as Chairman of the Governors' Conference, to the individual governors for their consideration. All of us are, I am sure, in agreement that the narcotics problem demands our prompt and thoughtful attention to the end that effective action may be taken in our respective fields of responsibility.
I should like to take this opportunity to convey, through you and the other members of the Conference, my thanks to the many people in State and other levels of Government who have cooperated with the Committee.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The report was the result of a study begun in response to the President's letter of November 27, 1954, to the heads of the departments represented on the Committee. It contains sections covering the following subjects: drug controls in the United States; drug addiction-character of the problem; the enforcement program; treatment and rehabilitation; Federal, State, and local responsibilities. The report concludes with 14 detailed recommendations for integrated Federal, State, and community action.
The Committee's report, transmitted to the President on February 1, 1956, by Secretary Humphrey, was released with the President's letter. It was also made available in a 17 page pamphlet entitled "Report of Interdepartmental Committee on Narcotics to the President" (Government Printing Office, 1956).