Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 15, 1956

Executive Order 10659—Amending the Selective Service Regulations
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Universal Military Training and Service Act (62 Stat. 604), as amended, and by section 262 of the Armed Forces Reserve Act of 1952, as added by section 2 (i) of the Reserve Forces Act of 1955 (69 Stat. 600), I hereby prescribe the following amendments of the Selective Service Regulations prescribed by Executive Orders No. 9979 of July 20, 1948, No. 9988 of August 20, 1948, No. 10001 of September 17, 1948, No. 10008 of October 18, 1948, No. 10116 of March 9, 1950, No. 10202 of January 12, 1951, No. 10258 of June 26, 1951, No. 10292 of September 25, 1951, No. 10344 of April 17, 1952, No. 10363 of June 17, 1952, No. 10420 of December 17, 1952, and No. 10505 of December 10, 1953, and constituting portions of Chapter XVI of Title 32 of the Code of Federal Regulations:
1. Section 1602.8 of Part 1602, Definitions, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1602.8 Military service. The term "military service" includes service in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard.
2. (a) (1) Subparagraph (5) of paragraph (b) of § 1611.2 of Part 1611, Duty and Responsibility to Register, is amended by striking out at the end thereof the word "or".
(2) Subparagraph (6) of paragraph (b) of § 1611.2 is amended to read as follows:
(6) He is a person who has entered the United States temporarily pursuant to the provisions of section 201 of the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 (62 Stat. 7; 22 U.S.C. 1446), as amended, and continues to pursue the purpose for which he was admitted;
(3) Three new subparagraphs (7), (8), and (9) are added to paragraph (b) of § 1611.2 to read as follows:
(7) He is a person who has entered the United States temporarily as a nonimmigrant under the provisions of section 101 (a) (15) (F) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Public Law 414, 82nd Congress) solely for the purpose of pursuing a full course of study at an established institution of learning or other recognized place of study in the United States, particularly designated by him and approved by the Attorney General after consultation with the Office of Education of the United States, and continues to pursue such purpose to the satisfaction of the Attorney General.
(8) He is a national of a country with which there is in effect a treaty or international agreement exempting nationals of that country from military service while they are within the United States.
(9) He is a person who has entered the United States and remains therein pursuant to the provisions of the Agreement between the Parties to the North Atlantic Treaty Regarding the Status of their Forces, or the Agreement on the Status of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, National Representatives and International Staff, or the Protocol on the Status of International Military Headquarters Set up Pursuant to the North Atlantic Treaty.
(b) Paragraph (c) of § 1611.2 is amended to read as follows:
(c) Each alien who is in the category described in subparagraph (8) of paragraph (a) of this section or who is in one of the categories described in subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (8), and (9) of paragraph (b) of this section must have in his persona: possession, at all times, an official document issued pursuant to the authorization of or described by the Director of Selective Service which identifies him as a person not required to present himself for and submit to registration.
(c) Paragraph (e) of § 1611.2 is amended to read as follows:
(e) Each alien who is in the category described in subparagraph (6) of paragraph (b) of this section must have in his possession and available for examination a visa or other official document issued to him by a diplomatic, consular, or immigration officer of the United States evidencing that he has entered the United States as an exchange visitor either (1) pursuant to the provisions of section 201 of the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 (62 Stat. 7; 22 U.S.C. 1446; Public Law 402, 80th Congress), or (2) pursuant to the provisions of sections 101 (a) (15) and 402 (f) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Public Law 414, 82d Congress).
(d) A new paragraph (f) is added to § 1611.2 to read as follows:
(f) Each alien who is in the category described in subparagraph (7) of paragraph (b) of this section must have in his possession and available for examination a visa or other official document issued to him by a diplomatic, consular, or immigration officer of the United States evidencing that he has entered the United States pursuant to the provisions of section 101 (a) (15) (F) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Public Law 414, 82d Congress).
3. (a) Paragraph (a) of § 1622.1 of Part 1622, Classification Rules and Principles, is amended to read as follows:
(a) The Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, provides that every male citizen of the United States, every male alien admitted to the United States for permanent residence, and every male alien who has remained in the United States in a status other than that of permanent resident for a period exceeding one year, who is between the ages of 18 years and 6 months and 26 years, shall be liable for training and service in the Armed Forces of the United States, and that persons who on June 19, 1951, were, or thereafter are, deferred under the provisions of clause (A) or clause (C) of section 6 (c) (2) of such act shall remain liable for training and service until they attain the age of 28, and that persons who on June 19, 1951, were, or thereafter are, deferred under any other provision of section 6 of such act shall remain liable for training and service until they attain the age of 35. Certain exemptions and deferments are specifically provided; others are authorized to be provided by regulations promulgated by the President.
(b) Section 1622.2 of Part 1622 is amended by deleting from the list of classes appearing therein "Class I-C: Member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Coast and Geodetic Survey or the Public Health Service, and certain registrants separated therefrom." and inserting in lieu thereof "Class I-C: Member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, or the Public Health Service.".
(c) (1) The headnote of § 1622.12 of Part 1622 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1622.12 Class I-C: Member of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, or the Public Health Service.
(2) Paragraphs (e) and (f) of § 1622.12 are revoked.
(d) (1) Paragraphs (d) and (e) of § 1622.13 of Part 1622 are amended to read as follows:
(d) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who prior to attaining the age of 18 years and 6 months, and prior to the determination by the Secretary of Defense that adequate trained personnel are available to the National Guard to enable it to maintain its strength authorized by current appropriations, enlisted or accepted appointment in any organized unit of the National Guard in any case in which the Governor of the State has determined and has issued a proclamation to the effect that the organized strength of such organized unit of the National Guard of his State cannot be maintained by enlistment or appointment of persons referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, or persons who are not liable for training and service under the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended. Such registrant shall remain eligible for Class I-D so long as he continues to serve satisfactorily as a member of such organized unit.
(e) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who (1) has been selected for enrollment or continuance in the senior division, Reserve Officers' Training Corps, or the Air Reserve Officers' Training Corps, or the Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps, or the Naval and Marine Corps officer candidate training program, or the Reserve officers' candidate program of the Navy, or the platoon leaders' class of the Marine Corps, or the officer procurement programs of the Coast Guard and the Coast Guard Reserve, or is appointed an ensign, United States Naval Reserve, while undergoing professional training; (2) has agreed, in writing, to accept a commission, if tendered, and to serve, subject to order of the Secretary of the military department having jurisdiction over him (or the Secretary of the Treasury with respect to the United States Coast Guard), not less than two years on active duty after receipt of a commission; and (3) has agreed to remain a member of a regular or reserve component until the eighth anniversary of the receipt of a commission in accordance with his obligation under the first sentence of section 4 (d) (3) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, or until the sixth anniversary of the receipt of a commission in accordance with his obligation under the second sentence of section 4
(d) (3) of such act. Such registrant shall remain eligible for Class I-D until completion or termination of the course of instruction and so long thereafter as he continues in a reserve status upon being commissioned except during any period he is eligible for Class I-C under the provisions of § 1622.12.
(2) Three new paragraphs (1), (j), and (k) are added to § 1622.13 to read as follows:
(1) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant (1) who prior to attaining the age of 18 years and six months and prior to his being ordered to report for induction, or (2) who after being selected for enlistment in a unit of the Ready Reserve in the manner provided in Part 1680 of this chapter by reason of his having a critical skill and being engaged in a civilian occupation in a critical defense-supporting industry or in a research activity affecting national defense, enlisted for a period of eight years in a unit of the Ready Reserve of the Army Reserve, Naval Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Air Force Reserve, or Coast Guard Reserve under the provisions of section 262 of the Armed Forces Reserve Act of 1952. Such registrant shall remain eligible for Class I-D so long as he continues to serve satisfactorily as a member of a reserve component, as determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the department concerned.
(j) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who prior to attaining the age of 18 years and 6 months and prior to his being ordered to report for induction, enlisted in an organized unit of the Ready Reserve of the Army Reserve, Naval Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Air Force Reserve, or Coast Guard Reserve under the provisions of section 6
(c) (2) (C) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended. Such registrant shall remain eligible for Class I-D so long as he continues to serve satisfactorily as a member of an organized unit of such Ready Reserve.
(k) In Class I-D shall be placed any registrant who at any time has enlisted in the Army Reserve, the Naval Reserve, the Marine Corps Reserve, the Air Force Reserve, or the Coast Guard Reserve and who thereafter has been commissioned therein upon graduation from an Officers' Candidate School of such Armed Force and has not been ordered to active duty as a commissioned officer. Such registrant shall remain eligible for Class I-D so long as he performs satisfactory service as a commissioned officer in an appropriate unit of the Ready Reserve, as determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the department concerned.
(e) A new paragraph (c) is added to § 1622.24 of Part 1622 to read as follows:
(c) The existence of a shortage or a surplus of any agricultural commodity shall not be considered in determining the deferment of any individual on the grounds that his employment in agriculture is necessary to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest.
(f) Section 1622.40 of Part 1622 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1622.40 Class IV-A: Registrant who has completed service; sole surviving son. (a) In Class DT-A shall be placed any registrant who falls within any of the following categories:
(1) A registrant who served honorably on active duty between December 7, 1941, and September 2, 1945, for a period in excess of 90 days, in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, the Public Health Service, or the armed forces of any country allied with the United States in World War II prior to September 2, 1945.
(2) A registrant who subsequent to September 16, 1940, was discharged for
the convenience of the Government after having served honorably on active duty for a period of not less than six months in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, or the Coast Guard.
(3) A registrant who has served honorably on active duty after September 16, 1940, for a period of not less than one year in the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, or the Coast Guard.
(4) A registrant who served honorably on active duty between September 16, 1940, and June 24, 1948, for a period of 12 months or more in the Public Health Service or the armed forces of any country allied with the United States in World War II prior to September 2, 1945.
(5) A registrant who has served on active duty for a period of not less than twenty-four months as a commissioned officer in the Public Health Service or the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
(6) A registrant who is certified by the Department of State to have served on active duty subsequent to June 24, 1948, for a period of not less than eighteen months in the armed forces of a nation with which the United States is associated in mutual defense activities as defined by the President, and to be a national of a country which grants exemption from training and service in its armed forces to citizens of the United States who have served on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States subsequent to June 24, 1948, for a period of not less than eighteen months. In computing such eighteen-month period, there shall be credited any active duty performed by the registrant prior to June 24, 1948, in the armed forces of a country allied with the United States during World War II and with which the United States is associated in such mutual defense activities.
(7) A registrant who has completed eight years of satisfactory service as a member of a reserve component of an armed force pursuant to an enlistment for eight years in a unit of the Ready Reserve under the provisions of section 262 of the Armed Forces Reserve Act of 1952.
(8) A registrant who has completed eight years of satisfactory service as a member of an organized unit of the National Guard pursuant to an enlistment or appointment under the provisions of section 6 (c) (2) (A) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and who during such service has performed active duty for training with an armed force for not less than three consecutive months.
(9) A registrant who has completed eight years of satisfactory service as a member of an organized unit of the Ready Reserve pursuant to an enlistment under the provisions of section 6 (c) (2) (C) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and who during such service has performed a period of active duty for training of not less than three months pursuant to clause (1) of section 262 (c) of the Armed Forces Reserve Act of 1952.
(10) A registrant who is the sole surviving son of a family of which one or more sons or daughters were killed in action or died in line of duty while serving in the armed forces of the United States, or subsequently died as a result of injuries received or disease incurred during such service.
(b) For the purpose of computation of periods of active duty referred to in subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of paragraph (a) of this section, no credit shall be allowed for—
(1) Periods of active duty training performed as a member of a reserve component pursuant to an order or call to active duty solely for training purposes;
(2) Periods of active duty in which the service consisted solely of training under the Army specialized training program, the Army Air Force college training program, or any similar program under the jurisdiction of the Navy, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard;
(3) Periods of active duty as a cadet of the United States Military Academy or United States Coast Guard Academy, or as a midshipman at the United States Naval Academy, or in a preparatory school after nomination as a principal, alternate, or candidate for admission to any such academies; or
(4) Periods of active duty in any of the armed forces while being processed for entry into or separation from any educational program or institution referred to in subparagraphs (2) or (3) of this paragraph.
(g) Paragraph (c) of § 1622.42 of Part 1622 is revoked and paragraph (d) of § 1622.42 is redesignated as paragraph (c).
(h) Section 1622.44 of Part 1622 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1622.44 Class IV-F: Physically, mentally, or morally unfit. In Class IV-F shall be placed any registrant (a) who is found to be physically or mentally unfit for any service in the armed forces other than a registrant who has been separated from the armed forces because of physical or mental disability by an honorable discharge or a discharge under honorable conditions or an equivalent type of release from service and who is eligible for Class IV-A under the provisions of § 1622.40; (b) who, under the procedures and standards prescribed by the Secretary of Defense, is found to be morally unacceptable for any service in the armed forces; (c) who has been convicted of a criminal offense which may be punished by death or by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and who is not eligible for classification into a class available for service; or (d) who has been separated from the armed forces by discharge other than an honorable discharge or a discharge under honorable conditions, or an equivalent type of release from service, and for whom the local board has not received a statement from the armed forces that the registrant is morally acceptable notwithstanding such discharge or separation.
(I) Paragraph (b) of § 1622.50 of Part 1622 is redesignated as paragraph (c) and a new paragraph (b) is added to § 1622.50 to read as follows:
(b) In Class V-A shall be placed every registrant who has attained the twenty-eighth anniversary of the day of his birth except (1) those registrants who are in active military service in the armed forces and are in Class I-C, (2) those registrants who are performing civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest in accordance with the order of the local board and are in Class I-W, (3) those registrants who have consented to induction, and (4) those registrants who on June 19, 1951, or at any time thereafter, were deferred under any provision of section 6 of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, other than the provisions of clauses (A) and (C) of subsection (c) (2) of such section. Except as is otherwise provided in this paragraph, registrants who prior to attaining the twenty-eighth anniversary of the day of their birth have been classified in some other class shall, as soon as practicable after attaining the twenty-eighth anniversary of the day of their birth, be reclassified into Class V-A.
(j) Sections 1622.64 and 1622.65 of Part 1622 are revoked.
4. A new paragraph (c) is added to § 1623.9 of Part 1623, Classification Procedure, to read as follows:
(c) The State Director of Selective Service may transfer a registrant to another local board for classification at any time (1) when any member of the local board cannot act on the registrant's case because of disqualification under the provisions of § 1604.52a or § 1604.55 of this chapter, or (2) when the State Director of Selective Service deems such transfer to be necessary in order to assure equitable administration of the selective service law.
5. (a) Paragraph (a) of § 1624.2 of Part 1624, Appearance Before Local Board, is amended to read as follows:
(a) At the time and place fixed by the local board, the registrant may appear in person before the member or members of the local board designated for the purpose. A notation that he has appeared shall be entered on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100).
(b) Section 1624.3 of Part 1624 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1624.3 Appearance before local board stays induction. The local board shall not issue an order for a registrant to report for induction either during the period afforded the registrant to request an appearance in person before a member or members of the local board or, if the registrant has requested such an appearance, during the period such appearance is pending. Any order to report for induction which has been issued during either of such periods shall be ineffective and shall be cancelled by the local board.
6. (a) (1) Paragraph (a) of § 1626.2 of Part 1626, Appeal to Appeal Board, is amended to read as follows:
(a) The registrant, any person who claims to be a dependent of the registrant, any person who prior to the classification appealed from filed a written request for the current occupational deferment of the registrant, or the government appeal agent may appeal to an appeal board from the classification of a registrant by the local board in any class other than Class I-C, Class I-W, Class IV-F, and Class V-A.
(2) Paragraph (d) of § 1626.2 is amended to read as follows:
(d) At any time prior to the date the local board mails to the registrant an Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252), the local board may permit any person described in paragraph (c) of this section to appeal even though the period for taking an appeal has elapsed, if it is satisfied that the failure of such person to appeal within such period was due to a lack of understanding of the right to appeal or to some cause beyond the control of such person. Unless the local board thereafter permits an appeal, the right of such persons to appeal shall expire at the end of the period provided for in paragraph (c) of this section. If an extension of time to appeal is granted by the local board, a record thereof shall be entered on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100).
(b) Paragraph (d) of § 1626.11 of Part 1626 is amended to read as follows:
(d) The local board shall enter on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the date on which an appeal is filed, and, if the appeal is taken by any person other than the registrant, the local board shall notify the registrant that an appeal has been taken.
(c) Paragraph (b) of § 1626.24 of Part 1626 is amended to read as follows:
(b) In reviewing the appeal and classifying the registrant, the appeal board shall not receive or consider any information other than the following:
(1) Information contained in the record received from the local board.
(2) General information concerning economic, industrial, and social conditions.
(3) Any advisory recommendation from the Department of Justice under § 1626.25.
(4) Any reply to the recommendation of the Department of Justice received from the registrant under § 1626.25.
(d) (1) Paragraph (a) of § 1626.25 of Part 1626 is amended to read as follows:
(a) If an appeal involves the question whether or not a registrant is entitled to be sustained in his claim that he is a conscientious objector, the appeal board shall transmit the entire file to the United States Attorney for the Federal judicial district in which the appeal board has jurisdiction for the purpose of securing an advisory recommendation from the Department of Justice.
(2) Paragraph (c) of § 1626.25 is amended to read as follows:
(c) Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Department of Justice, the appeal board shall mail a copy thereof to the registrant together with a letter advising the registrant that, within 30 days after the date of such mailing, he may file with the appeal board a written reply concerning the recommendation of the Department of Justice. Upon receipt of the reply of the registrant or the expiration of the period afforded him to make such reply, whichever occurs first, the appeal board shall determine the classification of the registrant, and in its determination it shall give consideration to, but shall not be bound to follow, the recommendation of the Department of Justice. The appeal board also shall give consideration to any reply to such recommendation received from the registrant. The appeal board shall place in the Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101) of the registrant the recommendation of the Department of Justice, a copy of its letter transmitting a copy of such recommendation to the registrant, and any reply to such recommendation received from the registrant.
(e) (1) Paragraphs (a) and (b) of § 1626.31 of Part 1626 are amended to read as follows:
(a) Mail a Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) to the registrant, mail a Classification Advice (SSS Form No. 111) to every person who has on file a written request for the current deferment of the registrant, and enter upon each such form mailed the record of the vote of the appeal board as follows: "Vote of appeal board—Yes—No
(b) Enter on the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102) and on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the classification given the registrant by the appeal board and the date of mailing of the Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) and also enter on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the date of mailing of each Classification Advice (SSS Form No. 111) and the name of the person to whom it is mailed.
(2) Paragraph (c) of 1626.31 is revoked.
(f) Section 1626.41 of Part 1626 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1626.41 Appeal stays induction. The local board shall not issue an order for a registrant to report for induction either during the period afforded the registrant to take an appeal to the appeal board or during the period such an appeal is pending. Any order to report for induction which has been issued during either of such periods shall be ineffective and shall be cancelled by the local board. Whenever an appeal to the appeal board has been taken by a person entitled to do so, any order to report for induction which has previously been issued to the registrant shall be ineffective and shall be cancelled by the local board.
7. (a) (1) Paragraph (b) of § 1627.7 of Part 1627, Appeal to the President, is amended to read as follows:
(b) Enter on the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102) and on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the classification given the registrant by the President and the date of mailing of the Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) and also enter on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the date of mailing of each Classification Advice (SSS Form No. 111) and the name of the person to whom it is mailed.
(2) Paragraph (c) of § 1627.7 is revoked.
(b) Section 1627.8 of Part 1627 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1627.8 Appeal to the President stays induction. The local board shall not issue an order for a registrant to report for induction either during the period afforded the registrant to take an appeal to the President or during the period such an appeal is pending. Any order to report for induction which has been issued during either of such periods shall be ineffective and shall be cancelled by the local board. Whenever an appeal to the President has been taken by a person entitled to do so, any order to report for induction which has previously been issued to the registrant shall be ineffective and shall be cancelled by the local board.
8. (a) Subparagraph (2) of paragraph (b) of § 1628.4 of Part 1628, Physical Examination, is amended to read as follows:
(2) Enter on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the date the Notice to Registrant to Appear for Medical Interview (SSS Form No. 219) was mailed to the registrant and the date upon which he is ordered to appear.
(b) Paragraph (b) of § 1628.5 of Part 1628 is amended to read as follows:
(b) Upon receiving such request for transfer for medical interview the registrant's own local board shall forward the original and three copies of the Record of Induction (DD Form No. 47), after completing all of Section I except item 2, and item 18 of Section II thereof, to the local board of transfer and shall enter on the Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) the date such forms were forwarded and the designation of the local board of transfer.
(c) Paragraphs (c) and (d) of § 1628.14 of Part 1628 are amended to read as follows:
(c) (1) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (d) of this section the local board with which such registrant files such request shall investigate the circumstances of the registrant's absence from his own local board area. If it finds that he does not have a good reason for his absence, it shall endorse its disapproval upon the Transfer for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 222), mail the original thereof to the registrant's own local board, mail a copy to the registrant, and file one of the remaining copies. Such registrant shall then be required to report in accordance with the Order to Report for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 223) which he received from his own local board.
(2) If the local board with which the registrant files such request finds that he has a good reason for his absence from his own local board area and that he is so far from his own local board area that it would be a hardship for him to return to his own local board area for his armed forces physical examination, it shall endorse its approval upon the Transfer for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 222), mail the original and one copy by air mail (unless ordinary mail is as expeditious) to the registrant's own local board, mail a copy to the registrant, and file the remaining copy.
(d) The local board with which such registrant files such request shall endorse its approval upon the Transfer for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 222) whenever the registrant is located in one and the registrant's own local board is located in another of the following: The continental United States, the Territory of Alaska, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, or the Canal Zone. The local board shall mail the original and one copy of the Transfer for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 222) by air mail to the registrant's own local board, mail a copy to the registrant, and file the remaining copy.
(d) Paragraph (b) of § 1628.15 of Part 1628 is revoked and paragraph (c) of § 1628.15 is redesignated as paragraph (b) and is amended to read as follows:
(b) Whenever the Director of Selective Service has directed that a registrant shall be transferred for armed forces physical examination, the registrant's own local board or the clerk thereof shall complete the Transfer for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 222) in duplicate by inserting the date, the name, selective service number, and present address of the registrant, and the words "By the direction of the Director of Selective Service" in the request portion of the form and by completing the second endorsement on the form. The copy of the Transfer for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 222) shall be filed in the registrant's Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101). The local board shall then mail the original of the Transfer for Armed Forces Physical Examination (SSS Form No. 222). the original and three copies of the Record of Induction (DD Form No. 47), any information in the possession of the local board which should be considered by the armed forces in determining the acceptability of the registrant for military service, and any other records designated by the Director of Selective Service to the local board to which the registrant is transferred for armed forces physical examination. The local board to which the registrant is transferred shall cause the registrant to be given an armed forces physical examination and shall take the actions provided for in paragraphs (f) and (g) of § 1628.14.
(e) Subparagraph (2) of paragraph
(d) of § 1628.25 of Part 1628 is amended to read as follows:
(2) When a Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62) indicates that a registrant has been found acceptable for military service or that a registrant has been found not acceptable for military service, the local board shall immediately mail the original of such certificate together with any attachments thereto to the registrant, record the date of mailing of such Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62) on the registrant's Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100), and file the copy of the Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62) in the registrant's Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101).
9. Paragraph (a) of § 1630.4 of Part 1630, Volunteers, is amended to read as follows:
(a) Disregarding all other grounds for deferment, he would be classified in Class II-A, Class II-C, Class III-A, or Class IV-A;
10. (a) Paragraph (a) of § 1631.7 of Part 1631, Quotas and Calls, is amended to read as follows:
(a) Each local board, upon receiving a Notice of Call on Local Board (SSS Form No. 201) from the State Director of Selective Service for a specified number of men shall select and order to report for induction the number of men required to fill the call from among its registrants who have been classified in Class I-A and Class I-A-0 and have been found acceptable for service in the armed forces and to whom the local board has mailed a Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62) at least 21 days before the date fixed for induction: Provided, That a registrant classified in Class I-A or Class I-A-0 who Is a delinquent may be selected and ordered to report for induction to fill an induction call notwithstanding the fact that he has not been found acceptable for service in the armed forces and has not been mailed a Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62): And provided further, That a registrant classified in Class I-A or Class I-A-0 who has volunteered for induction may, if an appeal is not pending in his case and the period during which an appeal may be taken has expired, be selected and ordered to report for induction notwithstanding the fact that he has not been found acceptable for service in the armed forces and regardless of whether or not a Certificate of Acceptability (DD Form No. 62) has been mailed to him. Such registrants shall be selected and ordered to report for induction in the following order:
(1) Delinquents who have attained the age of 19 years in the order of their dates of birth with the oldest being selected first.
(2) Volunteers who have not attained the age of 26 years in the sequence in which they have volunteered for induction.
(3) Nonvolunteers who have attained the age of 19 years and have not attained the age of 26 years and who do not have a child or children with whom they maintain a bona fide family relationship in their homes, in the order of their dates of birth with the oldest being selected first.
(4) Nonvolunteers who have attained the age of 19 years and have not attained the age of 26 years and who have a child or children with whom they maintain a bona fide family relationship in their homes, in the order of their dates of birth with the oldest being selected first.
(5) Nonvolunteers who have attained the age of 26 years in the order of their dates of birth with the youngest being selected first.
(6) Nonvolunteers who have attained the age of 18 years and 6 months and who have not attained the age of 19 years in the order of their dates of birth with the oldest being selected first.
In selecting registrants in the order of their dates of birth, if two or more registrants have the same date of birth they shall, as among themselves, be selected In alphabetical order.
(b) The following new § 1631.8 is added to Part 1631 immediately following § 1631.7:
§ 1631.8 Registrants who shall be inducted without calls. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of the regulations in this chapter, any registrant who after enlistment or appointment in the Ready Reserve of any reserve component of the Armed Forces pursuant to authority conferred by section 6 (c) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, or under section 262 of the Armed Forces Reserve Act of 1952, as amended, has failed to serve satisfactorily as a member of such Ready Reserve as certified by the respective armed force, shall be ordered to report for induction by the local board regardless of the class in which he is classified and without changing his classification. Any such registrant shall be forwarded for induction at the next time the local board is forwarding other registrants for induction or at any prior time when special arrangements have been made with the induction station, without any calls being made for the delivery of such registrants. Whenever the local board desires to deliver such a registrant specially, it shall request the State Director of Selective Service to make the special arrangements for the time and place at which the registrant may be delivered for induction.
(b) At the induction station, each registrant who is forwarded for induction under paragraph (a) of this section shall be inducted into the armed force of which the reserve component in which the registrant is a member is a part.
11. (a) Section 1632.9 of Part 1632, Delivery and Induction, is amended to read as follows:
§ 1632.9 Certain registrants may request transfer for induction. (a) Any registrant who is so far from his own local board that reporting to his own local board for induction would be a hardship may, subject to the provisions of this section, be transferred for induction to the local board having jurisdiction of the area in which he is at that time located. Application for such transfer may be made by the registrant at the time he receives his Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252).
(b) Any such registrant desiring to be so transferred shall immediately report to the local board having jurisdiction of the area in which he is at that time located, present his Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252), and complete, in quintuplicate, the request portion of Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260).
(c) (1) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (d) of this section, the local board with which such registrant files such request shall investigate the circumstances of the registrant's absence from his own local board area. If it finds that he does not have a good reason for his absence, it shall endorse its disapproval upon the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), mail the original thereof to the registrant's own local board, mail a copy to the registrant, and file one of the remaining copies. Such registrant shall then be required to report in accordance with the Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252) of his own local board.
(2) If the local board with which the registrant files such request finds that he has a good reason for his absence from his own local board area and that he is so far from his own local board area that it would be a hardship for him to return to his own local board area for Induction, it shall endorse its approval upon the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), mail the original and two copies by air mail (unless ordinary mail is as expeditious) to the registrant's own local board, mail a copy to the registrant, and file the remaining copy.
(d) The local board with which such registrant files such request shall endorse its approval upon the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260) whenever the registrant is located in one and the registrant's own local board is located in another of the following: The continental United States, the Territory of Alaska, the Territory of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, or the Canal Zone. The local board shall mail the original and two copies of the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260) by air mail to the registrant's own local board, mail a copy to the registrant, and file the remaining copy.
(e) When necessary for the accomplishment of the early induction of the registrant, the local board with which the registrant files his request may telegraph the registrant's own local board notifying it of the approval of the registrant's application for such transfer and requesting that the necessary records of the registrant be immediately forwarded to the local board of transfer. In such instances, the local board of transfer shall confirm the telegram by immediately mailing the original and two copies of the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), with the endorsement of approval thereon, to the registrant's own local board.
(f) When the registrant's own local board receives the approved Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), or receives a telegraphic approval of a request for transfer as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, it shall take the following action:
(1) Complete on the original of the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), immediately it is received, the order transferring the registrant for induction.
(2) Prepare in triplicate the Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263) and the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263—A).
(3) Mail one copy of the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), one copy of the Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263), and one copy of the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263—A) to its State Director of Selective Service for his further action as provided in paragraph (j) of this section, and file one copy of the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), one copy of Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263), and one copy of Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263—A) in the registrant's Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101).
(4) Mail to the local board to which the registrant is transferred for induction the original of the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), the original of the Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263), the original of the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263—A), the original and three copies of the Record of Induction (DD Form No. 47), all other records referred to in subparagraph (2) of paragraph (a) of § 1632.5, and any other records designated by the Director of Selective Service.
(5) Place a notation of the transfer of the registrant in the "Remarks" column of the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102).
(6) When the registrant's own local board receives a telegraphic approval of a request for transfer all actions required by this paragraph shall be taken immediately except such as relate to the completion, filing, and mailing of the original and copies of the Request for Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 260), which actions shall be taken immediately that form is received from the local board of transfer.
(g) When the local board to which the registrant has been transferred for induction receives the papers from the registrant's own local board, as provided in paragraph (f) of this section, it shall proceed to deliver him for induction as soon as practicable after the date fixed for him to report for induction in the Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252) issued by his own local board. Whenever possible, the local board of transfer shall deliver the transferred registrant for induction with its next induction call, but if there is to be no such call within 30 days after the local board of transfer receives the papers from the registrant's own local board, it shall deliver the transferred registrant specially. When the transferred registrant is to be delivered specially, the local board of transfer shall request its State Director of Selective Service to make the necessary arrangements to deliver the transferred registrant specially at the earliest possible date. The local board to which the registrant has been transferred for induction shall prepare an Order for Transferred Man To Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 253), in duplicate, mail the original to the transferred registrant, and file the copy. The local board to which the registrant has been transferred for induction shall add the name of the registrant to its Delivery List (SSS Form No. 261) and shall make a notation of such transfer and the identity of the local board from which he is transferred in the "Remarks" column of the Delivery List (SSS Form No. 261).
(h) The local board to which the registrant has been transferred for induction shall not substitute the transferred registrant for one of its selected men, but shall deliver the transferred registrant in addition to any deliveries it otherwise would make to fill its own call.
(i) When the transferred registrant has been inducted or rejected or if he fails to report for induction, the local board to which such registrant was transferred for induction shall complete the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A), detach and forward it to the State Director of Selective Service for the State in which the local board of origin is located, and forward all papers with reference to such registrant, with the exception of the Delivery List (SSS Form No. 261), to his own local board.
(j) The State Director of Selective Service for the State in which the local board of origin is located shall, upon receipt from the local board of transfer of the completed Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A), record the disposition of the transferred registrant upon his copy of Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A) and forward the original of the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A) to the local board of origin.
(k) The transferred registrant, if inducted, shall not be credited to the local board to which he was transferred for delivery, but shall be credited to his own local board.
(b) (1) Paragraphs (b) and (e) of § 1632.10 of Part 1632 are revoked.
(2) Paragraph (c) of § 1632.10 is redesignated as paragraph (b) and is amended to read as follows:
(b) Whenever the Director of Selective Service has directed that a registrant shall be transferred for induction, the registrant's own local board or the clerk thereof shall take the following action:
(1) Prepare in triplicate the Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263) and the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A) and, on the first such form, enter the name and address of the local board to which the registrant is transferred for induction, line out the first line of the form, and enter in lieu of such line the words "By direction of the Director of Selective Service".
(2) Mail one copy of the Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263) and one copy of the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A) to its State Director of Selective Service and file one copy of the Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263) and one copy of the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A) in the registrant's Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101).
(3) Mail to the local board to which the registrant is transferred for induction the original of the Transfer for Delivery (SSS Form No. 263), the original of the Report of Delivery of Transferred Registrant (SSS Form No. 263-A), the original and three copies of the Record of Induction (DD Form No. 47), all other records referred to in subparagraph (2) of paragraph (a) of § 1632.5, and any other records designated by the Director of Selective Service.
(4) Place a notation of the transfer of the registrant in the "Remarks" column of the Classification Record (SSS Form No. 102).
(3) Paragraph (d) of § 1632.10 is re-designated as paragraph (c) and is amended to read as follows:
(c) When the local board to which the registrant has been transferred for induction receives the papers from the registrant's own local board, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, it shall proceed to deliver him for induction as soon as practicable. The local board to which the registrant has been transferred for induction shall prepare the Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252), in duplicate, in the same manner as if the transferred registrant were one of its own registrants, mail the original to the transferred registrant, and file the copy. The local board to which the registrant has been transferred for induction shall add the name of the registrant to its Delivery List (SSS Form No. 261), shall make a notation of such transfer and the identity of the local board from which he is transferred in the "Remarks" column of the Delivery List (SSS Form No. 261), and shall take the other actions provided for in paragraphs (h) and (i) of § 1632.9. The State Director of Selective Service for the State in which the registrant's own local board is located shall take the action provided for in paragraph (j) of § 1632.9.
(c) Paragraph (a) of § 1632.14 of Part 1632 is amended to read as follows:
(a) When the local board mails to a registrant an Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252) or an Order for Transferred Man to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 253), it shall be the duty of the registrant to report for induction at the time and place fixed in such order. If the time when the registrant is ordered to report for induction is postponed, it shall be the continuing duty of the registrant to report for induction upon the termination of such postponement and he shall report for induction at such time and place as may be fixed by the local board. Regardless of the time when or the circumstances under which a registrant fails to report for induction when it is his duty to do so, it shall thereafter be his continuing duty from day to day to report for induction to his local board and to each local board whose area he enters or in whose area he remains.
12. The following new § 1641.7 is added to Part 1641, Notice, immediately following § 1641.6:
§ 1641.7 Reporting by registrants of their current status. (a) It shall be the duty of every classified registrant to keep his local board currently informed of his occupational, marital, family, dependency, and military status and of his physical condition and home address. Every classified registrant shall, within 10 days after it occurs, report to his local board in writing every change in such status and in his physical condition and home address.
(b) A classified registrant shall submit to his local board in writing all information which the local board may at any time request from him concerning his occupational, marital, family, dependency, or military status or his physical condition. The registrant shall submit such information to his local board within 10 days after the date on which the local board mails him a request therefor, or within such longer period as may be fixed by the local board.
13. (a) The following new § 1642.4 is added to Part 1642, Delinquents, immediately following § 1642.3:
§ 1642.4 Declaration of delinquency status and removal therefrom. (a) Whenever a registrant has failed to perform any duty or duties required of him under the selective service law other than the duty to comply with an Order to Report for Induction (SSS Form No. 252) or the duty to comply with an Order to Report for Civilian Work and Statement of Employer (SSS Form No. 153), the local board may declare him to be a delinquent.
(b) When the local board declares a registrant to be a delinquent, it shall enter a record of such action and the date thereof on the registrant's Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and shall complete a Delinquency Notice (SSS Form No. 304), in duplicate, setting forth the duty or duties which the registrant has failed to perform. The local board shall mail the original to the registrant at his last known address and file the copy in his Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101).
(c) A registrant who has been declared to be a delinquent may be removed from that status by the local board at any time. When the local board removes a registrant from delinquency status, it shall enter a record of such action and the date thereof on the registrant's Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and shall advise the registrant of such removal by letter a copy of which shall be filed in his Cover Sheet (SSS Form No. 101).
(b) The following new § 1642.10 is added to Part 1642 immediately preceding § 1642.11:
§ 1642.10 Restriction on classification and induction of delinquents. No delinquent registrant shall be placed in Class I-A or Class I-A-0 under the provisions of § 1642.12 or shall be ordered to report for induction under the provisions of § 1642.13 or § 1631.7 of this chapter unless the local board has declared him to be a delinquent in accordance with the provisions of § 1642.4 and thereafter has not removed him from such delinquency status.
(c) Section 1642.12 of Part 1642 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1642.12 Classification of delinquent registrant. Any delinquent registrant between the ages of 18 years and 6 months and 26 years and any delinquent registrant between the ages of 26 and 28 who on June 19, 1951, was, or thereafter has been or may be, deferred under the provisions of clause (A) or clause (C) of section 6 (c) (2) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and any delinquent registrant between the ages of 26 and 35 who on June 19, 1951, was, or thereafter has been or may be, deferred under any other provision of section 6 of such act may be classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-O, whichever is applicable, regardless of other circumstances: Provided, That a delinquent registrant who by reason of his service in the armed forces is eligible for classification into Class IV-A may not be classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-O under this section unless such action is specifically authorized by the Director of Selective Service.
(d) Section 1642.13 of Part 1642 is amended to read as follows:
§ 1642.13 Certain delinquents to be ordered to report for induction. The local board shall order each delinquent registrant between the ages of 18 years and 6 months and 26 years and each delinquent registrant between the ages of 26 and 28 who on June 19, 1951, was, or thereafter has been or may be, deferred under the provisions of clause (A) or clause (C) of section 6 (c) (2) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and each delinquent registrant between the ages of 26 and 35 who on June 19, 1951, was, or thereafter has been or may be, deferred under any other provision of section 6 of such act who is classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-0 to report for induction in the manner provided in § 1631.7 of this chapter unless (a) it has already done so, or (b) pursuant to a written request of the United States Attorney, the local board determines not to order such registrant to report for induction.
14. (a) Paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of § 1650.8 of Part 1650, Registration, Classification, Physical Examination, Selection, and Induction of Persons in Medical, Dental, and Allied Specialist Categories, are amended to read as follows:
(c) In registering persons who are in priority one or priority two, as defined in paragraphs (2), (4), and (5) of section 4 (i) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the registrar shall give the special registrant a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100), three copies of Data for Determining Certain Qualifications of Special Registrants (DD Form No. 390), and a return envelope addressed to the local board of the registrar, which forms shall be completed by the special registrant and mailed to the local board in the return envelope within five days after his registration.
(d) When the completed Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and the three completed copies of Data for Determining Certain Qualifications of Special Registrants (DD Form No. 390) of a special registrant who is in priority one or priority two are received by the local board, and the special registrant has been previously registered under the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the local board shall forward the Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1), together with the questionnaire and the three copies of the data form, to the local board having jurisdiction over such registrant in the prior registration, which local board upon receiving such documents shall prepare the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) and mail it to the special registrant. If the special registrant has not been previously registered, the local board shall carefully check the place of residence of such special registrant as indicated on line 2 of his Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1), and if the local board finds that the place of residence shown is within its area, it shall prepare the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) and mail it to the special registrant. If the local board finds that the place of residence of the special registrant is not within its area, it shall dispose of the registration card, together with the questionnaire and the three copies of the data form, in the manner provided in § 1613.43 of this chapter, and the local board having jurisdiction over the place of residence upon receiving such documents shall prepare the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) and mail it to the special registrant.
(e) In registering persons who are in priority three or priority four, as defined in paragraphs (2), (4), and (5) of section 4 (1) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, the registrar shall deliver the registration card to the local board of the registrar. The Registration Card (SSS Form No. 1) of such a special registrant shall then be processed, and the Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) shall be prepared and mailed to the special registrant, in the manner provided in paragraph (d) of this section. The Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and the Data for Determining Certain Qualifications of Special Registrants (DD Form No. 390) shall not be delivered to registrants who are in priority three or four until such time as is fixed by the Director of Selective Service.
(b) (1) Paragraphs (b) and (c) of § 1650.11 of Part 1650 are amended to read as follows:
(b) Each special registrant who has not attained the forty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth shall be considered by the local board as available for military service until his eligibility for deferment or exemption from military service is clearly established to the satisfaction of the local board. The delivery to a special registrant of a Classification Questionnaire (SSS Form No. 100) and a Data for Determining Certain Qualifications of Special Registrants (DD Form No. 390) shall be notice to the registrant that unless information is presented to the local board, within the time specified for the return of the questionnaire and data form, which will justify his deferment or exemption from military service, the registrant will be classified in Class I-A.
(c) Every special registrant shall be placed in Class I-A under the provisions of § 1622.10 of this chapter except that when grounds are established to place such registrant in one or more of the classes listed in the following table, the special registrant shall be classified in the lowest class for which he is determined to be eligible, with Class I-A-0 considered the highest class and Class I-C considered the lowest class according to the following table:
Class I-A-0

I-0

II-A

II-S

III-A

IV-A

IV-B

IV-C

IV-D

IV-F

I-D

V-A

I-W

I-C
(2) Subparagraph (2) of paragraph (e) of § 1650.11 is amended to read as follows:
(2) A special registrant shall be placed in Class I-C if he has been inducted into the armed forces under the provisions of section 4 (i) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act, as amended, and thereafter has served on active duty for a period of twelve months or more, and has been separated from the armed forces by honorable discharge or discharge under honorable conditions or by an equivalent type of release from service, or has been so separated and transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces. Each such special registrant who has been transferred to a reserve component of the armed forces shall be identified on all records by following his classification with the abbreviation "Res.", and every other such special registrant shall be similarly identified with the abbreviation "Disc.". Upon attaining the forty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth, each such special registrant shall be reclassified in Class V-A.
(3) Paragraph (q) of § 1650.11 is amended to read as follows:
(q) (1) A special registrant shall be placed in Class V-A if he has attained the thirty-fifth anniversary of the day of his birth and also has applied for a commission in one of the armed forces in a medical, dental, or allied specialist category and has been rejected for such commission on the sole ground of a physical disqualification.
(2) A special registrant shall be placed in Class V-A if he has attained the forty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth unless (i) he is on active military service in the armed forces and is in Class I-C, or (ii) he is performing civilian work contributing to the maintenance of the national health, safety, or interest in accordance with the order of the local board and is in Class I-W. Except as is otherwise provided in this subparagraph, every special registrant who prior to attaining the forty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth has been classified in some other class shall, as soon as practicable after attaining the forty-sixth anniversary of the day of his birth, be reclassified into Class V-A.
(c) Paragraphs (c) and (d) of § 1650.30 of Part 1650 are amended to read as follows:
(c) In addition to the records mentioned in § 1628.17 of this chapter, the original and two copies of Data for Determining Certain Qualifications of Special Registrants (DD Form No. 390) shall be sent to the joint examining and induction station for each special registrant being forwarded for armed forces physical examination.
(d) After the armed forces physical examination of a special registrant has been accomplished and regardless of whether the registrant has been found acceptable or not acceptable for service in the armed forces, the final examining agency of the armed forces will forward to the State Director of Selective Service every record which under the provisions of § 1628.25 of this chapter would be forwarded to the local board or the State Director of Selective Service. The final examining agency of the armed forces will retain the original and one copy of Data for Determining Certain Qualifications of Special Registrants (DD Form No. 390) and send one copy to the State Director of Selective Service.
(d) Paragraphs (b) and (c) of § 1650.50 of Part 1650 are amended to read as follows:
(b) Any delinquent special registrant, except a special registrant who is eligible for Class IV-A or Class V-A under the provisions of paragraph (1) or paragraph (q) of § 1650.11, may be classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-O, whichever is applicable, regardless of other circumstances.
(c) The local board shall order each delinquent special registrant who is classified in or reclassified into Class I-A or Class I-A-0 under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section to report for induction in the manner provided in § 1650.44 unless (1) it has already done so, or (2) pursuant to a written request of the United States Attorney, the local board determines not to order such registrant to report for induction.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
February 15, 1956.