Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 26, 1960

Statement by the President Upon Leaving Brazil.
I MUST NOW say farewell to the leaders and people of this vast and beautiful country. I do so with a full heart weighed down by the tragic accident which cost the lives of Brazilians and Americans yesterday.
I wish, nevertheless, on leaving Brazil to express my deep gratitude for the magnitude of the reception accorded me and my associates since our arrival among you only a few days ago.. I am beginning to understand that sentiment which you Brazilians describe so poignantly with the word saudade.
I interpret the cordiality of your greeting as evidence of Brazilian friendship for my countrymen. I assure you that this friendship is earnestly reciprocated.
I saw your sparkling new capital at Brasilia--a symbol of Brazilian progress.
In Sao Paulo I saw firsthand the phenomenal development which forecasts Brazil's emergence as one of the world's new industrial giants.
And here in your present capital of Rio de Janeiro old memories of unsurpassed scenic beauty and traditional Carioca hospitality have been rekindled.
During the past few days my associates and I have had an opportunity to talk with your distinguished President and other leaders of your country. All of us hope and believe that these conversations will enable us to understand better not only Brazilian aspirations but also how our collaboration can become more effective to our mutual benefit.
As I proceed on this trip, I feel that a significant beginning in fulfilling its purpose has been made here. My desire, in the countries I am visiting, is to emphasize the importance we of the United States attach to hemispheric solidarity; to seek ways in which cooperation among the Americas may be even more fruitful, and to proclaim here as I have repeatedly done in other areas the supreme desire of the United States to do all it can to help bring about peace with justice, in freedom, to all humankind.
For your friendship and your many kindnesses, I thank you, and now, goodbye.
Note: The President left from Galeao Airport, Rio de Janeiro, at 8 p.m.
In the opening paragraph the President referred to the collision of a U.S. Navy transport plane with a Brazilian airliner over Guanabara Bay. The Navy transport plane was carrying U.S. Navy bandsmen and members of an anti-submarine team.
The statement was released in Rio de Janeiro.