Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 28, 1960

The Declaration of San Carlos de Bariloche: Joint Declaration by the President and President Frondizi of Argentina.
THE PRESIDENTS of the Argentine Nation and of the United States of America, having conferred on matters relating to peace, freedom and cultural and material opportunities for the peoples of the Americas, have decided to issue a joint declaration.
They reaffirm the determination of their respective governments to foster improved living standards for the peoples of the Americas.
They agree that:
Improved living standards result from economic progress which in turn depends upon adequate economic policies, upon friendly international cooperation, and upon efficient utilization both of natural resources and of the talents and capacities of the individual citizen acting alone or in voluntary association with others.
Economic progress and improved living standards facilitate the development of strong and stable political institutions and enable countries to make a more effective contribution to international understanding.
Likewise whatever serves to reinforce democratic institutions contributes not only to political, economic and social progress but also to the improvement of relations among nations.
The inter-American system, an expression of the common experience of the peoples of the Americas, has proved itself an effective instrument for peace and for cooperative relations among countries.
Experience within the inter-American system has taught that nonintervention is the keystone of international harmony and friendship and that its corollary is mutual respect among nations, however large or small.
The efforts of the Government of the Argentine Republic and of the United States of America will continue to be directed to the attainment of these inter-American ideals.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER

ARTURO FRONDIZI
Note: The joint declaration, released at San Carlos de Bariloche, was signed in the main hall of the Llao Llao Hotel.