Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 05, 1960

Memorandum to the Chairman, Civil Service Commission, on the Career Executive Development Program.
Memorandum for the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission:
No area of personnel management is of greater importance to sound administration than the selection and development of highly competent career administrators. As an indication of my personal concern in the matter I have sent the attached letter to the heads of all executive departments and agencies.
You will note that I have asked my Special Assistant for Personnel Management to assume responsibility for providing leadership in instituting service-wide action programs and to cooperate with the Civil Service Commission and the departments and agencies in stimulating better executive selection and development programs within agencies.
Therefore, it is my wish that you work with The Special Assistant for Personnel Management in devising methods for strengthening and coordinating existing programs and in developing new ones. As the operating arm for the largest segment of the Federal personnel management field, the Commission will continue to provide assistance to the departments and agencies in strengthening their executive development programs.
In this connection please review existing Civil Service programs concerned with recruitment and examining, position classification, career and employee development and take whatever steps may be necessary to strengthen them and to achieve maximum coordination.
In addition, the Commission will assemble periodically and report to me, information summarizing significant developments and progress being made by the departments and agencies in this area.
Because of your own long-time interest in this phase of Federal personnel management, I am confident that I can depend on you to help to make this program successful.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Roger W. Jones was serving as Chairman of the Civil Service Commission.
See also Items 26 and 27.