Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 11, 1957

Letter Accepting Resignation of Philip Young as Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and as the President's Adviser on Personnel Management.
Dear Phil:
It is with a deep feeling of loss that I view your resignation later this month as Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and as my Adviser on Personnel Management. All during the past four years I have been reassured by the knowledge that you were devoting your many abilities to the strengthening of the civil service and the entire personnel structure of the Federal Government. I am certain that all who have participated in our frequent discussions of these matters will share my regret at your departure.
As you so well know, it has been the constant purpose of this Administration to improve the conditions of government service and attract to it those well-trained, dedicated, intelligent people who are so essential to the proper conduct of public affairs. Through the many programs you have helped to develop, and particularly through your own full devotion to the highest principles of public service, you have contributed immeasurably to the achievement of our purpose. Government personnel at all levels, indeed the nation as a whole, will long recognize your outstanding service.
You have my heartfelt thanks for your strong support during these four years. I am grateful, too, that you are willing to be of further service in the future.
With warm personal regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Mr. Young's letter of February 8, 1957, follows:
Dear Mr. President:
I believe, and there are many who will support this opinion, that your Administration has made more progress in the development of Civil Service during these last four years than at any other time in its history. This record of accomplishment was only possible because of your leadership, your firm conviction as to the principles to be followed and your appreciation of the problems involved.
The discussions at the Cabinet meetings, Little Cabinet meetings and White House Staff meetings, which you asked me to attend as your Adviser on Personnel Management, have provided the strongest possible foundations for the personnel management program within our existing organizational structure. For the first time effective coordination of personnel policies has been achieved at the top levels of Government.
Now, in view of these accomplishments, the fact that the programs undertaken during these four years are well advanced, and the forthcoming initiation of the new system of fixed terms established by the Congress, I should like at this time to submit my resignation for your consideration.
For the last ten years, Mr. President, your enthusiastic leadership, your unfailing support and your confidence in me have been a constant source of inspiration. I am most grateful that I have had this opportunity to be of service to you and I look forward to our continuing association in the future. I am proud ' to have been a member of your Administration.
Sincerely,
PHILIP YOUNG
Mr. Young served as Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and as the President's Adviser on Personnel Management from March 23, 1953, to February 28, 1957. Prior to entering the Government service, Mr. Young was associated with the President at Columbia University.