Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 20, 1959

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Lopez Mateos of Mexico.
THE PRESIDENT of Mexico, Adolfo Lopez Mateos, and the President of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, in a meeting on February 19 and 20, 1959, at Acapulco, Mexico, discussed informally and without an agenda, the general aspects of relations between the two countries.
The Presidents reconfirmed that relations between Mexico and the United States are excellent and are characterized by a spirit of good neighborliness, mutual understanding and respect. They agreed that these relations can and should attain even higher levels not only because both countries have an interest in expanding the areas in which they may jointly cooperate but also because in common endeavor they can make a contribution to the cause of a just and lasting peace through continued efforts to improve the welfare of mankind and through adherence to those principles of liberty under law which are fundamental to enduring good will among nations.
Recognizing that the great strides made in modern science have opened almost limitless opportunities for the future of mankind, the two Presidents are convinced that relations between countries must comprise not only harmonious living under the rule of international law and the promotion of mutual trade and intercourse but also encompass broad programs of mutual cooperation so that the benefits of civilization may be brought within the reach of all the peoples of the world.
In their conversations the two Presidents discussed impact on their two countries of the development of travel across their common frontier. In this Mexican port of surpassing beauty where thousands of Americans happily visit every year, the Presidents considered it particularly appropriate to express their pleasure with the growing number of their countrymen representing every walk of Mexican and American life who have made a two-way street of a common border.
The two Chiefs of State agreed completely that economic development is an objective of cooperation between nations. They noted with keen satisfaction the efforts made in this direction by the Organization of American States and concurred in the desirability of continuing and increasing those efforts to the greatest possible extent.
During discussions on the general nature of relationships between Mexico and the United States the two Presidents considered several specific matters of particular interest.
Since cotton is Mexico's major export commodity and one of great importance to the United States, the two Presidents agreed that their Governments should cooperate and consult together in their efforts better to protect the interests of both countries in this vital commodity.
Convinced that it would benefit both countries further to harness the waters of the river which is their common boundary the two Presidents were in agreement as to the desirability of constructing the Diablo Dam on the Rio Grande at a site which has been agreed upon by the International Boundary and Water Commission and they hope to conclude an agreement for the construction of the Dam as rapidly as possible.
The two Presidents reviewed the lead and zinc question and agreed that both countries should continue to study ways to reach a multilateral solution to this international problem without prejudice to further efforts by the two countries toward a solution consonant with the spirit of collaboration which exists in all their relationships. This same spirit of cooperation is shown in efforts to devise means for the strengthening of the international coffee market through the International Coffee Study Group, in which both Governments are participating.
They also agreed to instruct agricultural authorities of their two Governments to plan a coordinated attack on the screw worm problem which is causing grave damage to livestock in both countries. For this purpose it was agreed to explore the feasibility of a joint program of eradication utilizing radioactive isotopes. This agreement is illustrative of the benefits to be derived from peaceful uses of nuclear energy in both domestic and international affairs.
The Acapulco meeting was a meeting between friends. The two Presidents understood and appreciated each other from the beginning. They are determined to continue to collaborate on matters of mutual concern through their Governments and through international organizations. The meeting, moreover, confirmed anew that a personal relationship between the Presidents of Mexico and the United States is an essential element in fostering confidence and good will among the peoples of the two neighboring countries.
Note: This statement was released at Acapulco, Mexico.