Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 29, 1960

Remarks in Santiago in Response to Greetings by President Alessandri of Chile.
Mr. President and gentlemen:
Mr. President, permit me to say that in a fairly long life, I have listened to a great many public statements. I have heard no more statesmanlike statement of this kind than the one I have just heard from you. I am grateful for what you have said.
I thank you for the cordiality of your welcome to me and my party. We have experienced also a heartwarming greeting from many people who gathered along the way from the airport, or assembled at this historic palace. To all who have so graciously bid us welcome, I express most earnest appreciation.
And, Mr. President, there seems to be no words in the English language, at least not in my vocabulary, that permit me to express properly. the true appreciation I feel. I can say only that the affection that I believe that I saw in these crowds along the street, the affection for my people, is reciprocated from the bottom of my heart.
We have come to Chile to reaffirm the friendship of my people for yours, and to discuss with you and your associates many matters of hemispheric and world importance.
We hope to taste the flavor of this land, which is noted for its beauty, for the hospitality of its people, and the vigor of their traditions from the days of San Martin and O'Higgins. But beyond this, I keenly anticipate the serious discussions we shall have.
I am especially pleased that this visit could occur in the year in which your nation is celebrating its 150th anniversary of independence. On behalf of the people of the United States, who know full well the blessings of independence and freedom, I extend warm congratulations to you and all citizens of Chile.
Our two nations are justly proud of the peaceful, harmonious, and mutually helpful relations which have existed between us over these many years. To strengthen these relations still more is my devout wish, as I am sure it is yours.
Indeed, as the bonds between our two countries become ever stronger we help produce a greater solidarity among all our American States. Cooperation among us all is thus improved--as is also our common determination to oppose any aggression from outside, no matter what form it may take.
As you have most aptly put it, we of all the Americas must accept with enthusiasm our common destiny. And a principal purpose of my visit here is to demonstrate our eagerness to remove from our mutual relations any possible suspicion, fear, or restraint--to demonstrate our hope to work with you in perfect trust. In this effort the primary factor is the observance by all of the principle of nonintervention.
And among the members of my party are six distinguished private citizens who, with Secretary Herter and Assistant Secretary Rubottom, comprise our Government's newly established National Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs. These gentlemen are leaders in governmental, educational, industrial, labor, and cultural affairs, and are noted for their dedication to promoting hemispheric solidarity. They are charged with the task of constantly studying inter-American relations and formulating appropriate recommendations to our Government and private institutions. Thus they will help promote understanding of Latin America in the United States of America.
I personally have looked forward to this opportunity to confer with you, Mr. President, and with your colleagues, in the manner of good friends seeking to strengthen their understanding of one another's problems.
I have been told that Chileans have a vigorous tradition of free and candid speech, and that they welcome this quality in others. We, too, welcome open and honest expression of views, and thus I am sure our conversations will be fruitful.
In the words you have just spoken, Mr. President, you have given us all a comprehensive panorama of the ideas, the problems, the objectives with which we must be concerned. You have given our discussions a most constructive start. The citizens of the United States, when they read what you have just said, will applaud your words.
They and I agree wholeheartedly that our problems can be solved through more intensive cooperative effort.
It is the earnest hope of my countrymen that our two peoples will continue to work in harmony and good will toward the goal cherished by all democratic peoples--a world of peace and friendship in freedom.
Thank you for your kind invitation for us to visit you.
I repeat--we are delighted to be here, and are deeply moved by the reception given us.
Note: The President spoke at 4:07 p.m. at La Moneda Palace, official residence of President Jorge Alessandri Rodriguez. Earlier the President had been met at Los Cerrillos Airport by President Alessandri, other Chilean officials, and U.S. Ambassador Waiter Howe.