Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 03, 1961

Statement by the President on Terminating Diplomatic Relations With Cuba
BETWEEN ONE and two o'clock this morning, the Government of Cuba delivered to the United States Charge d'Affaires ad interim of the United States Embassy in Habana a note stating that the Government of Cuba had decided to limit the personnel of our Embassy and Consulate in Habana to eleven persons. Forty-eight hours was granted for the departure of our entire staff with the exception of eleven. This unusual action on the part of the Castro Government can have no other purpose than to render impossible the conduct of normal diplomatic relations with that Government.
Accordingly, I have instructed the Secretary of State to deliver a note to the Charge d'Affaires ad interim of Cuba in Washington which refers to the demand of his Government and states that the Government of the United States is hereby formally terminating diplomatic and consular relations with the Government of Cuba. Copies of both notes are being made available to the press.
This calculated action on the part of the Castro Government is only the latest of a long series of harassments, baseless accusations, and vilification. There is a limit to what the United States in self-respect can endure. That limit has now been reached. Our friendship for the Cuban people is not affected. It is my hope and my conviction that in the not too distant future it will be possible for the historic friendship between us once again to find its reflection in normal relations of every sort. Meanwhile, our sympathy goes out to the people of Cuba now suffering under the yoke of a dictator.
Note: The text of the notes exchanged by the United States and Cuban Governments and released with the President's statement is published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 44, p. 103).
On January 4 the Press Secretary to the President stated in a release that the termination of diplomatic and consular relations with Cuba had no effect on the status of the naval station at Guantanamo. He added that the treaty rights under which the naval station is maintained may not be abrogated without the consent of the United States.