Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 26, 1955

Toasts of the President and President Magloire of Haiti.
My Friends:
It is a privilege to welcome to this country and to this house the President of Haiti and Mrs. Magloire. He comes from a Republic with which ours has a long record of friendship. We know that his visit can serve only to strengthen and to give fresh vigor and vitality to those ties.
We do trust that while they and their party are here in our country, they will find themselves in the midst of people that they feel are welcoming them to our shores, and extending to them the warm hand of hospitality.
When they go back home, we trust that they will have even a deeper affection than ever for this country and for our people--as we shall have for them.
So, as a token of our welcome to them, will you rise to drink, with me, a Toast to President and Mrs. Magloire.
Note: The President proposed this toast at a state dinner at the White House, at 9:50 p.m. President Magloire responded as follows:
Mr. President:
To the honor of being this evening the guest of one of the greatest military leaders that the United States has had, is added my profound satisfaction of being the spokesman of the whole Haitian nation, to express to the most qualified representative of this friendly country our profound gratitude for the generous assistance which comes to us from our powerful neighbors for the solution of the vital problem which we are facing.
I also take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for the spontaneity with which you have come to our help at the time of the recent hurricane, which has caused so much damage in Haiti, and to beg you to accept our wishes for the continuing prosperity of the United States, and the arrival of this era of peace to the triumph to which you devote all your efforts.
To Mrs. Eisenhower, who represents with such dignity the American women, who beside their husbands work to make more beautiful and much stronger this land of liberty, I address in the names of Mrs. Magloire and myself, with our thanks, the cordial salute of the Republic of Haiti.