Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 18, 1961

Executive Order 10913—Amending Executive Order 10584 of December 18, 1954, Prescribing Rules and Regulations Relating to the Administration of the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.), and as President of the United States, it is ordered that Executive Order No. 10584 of December 18, 1954, be, and it is hereby, amended by deleting sections 1, 2, 3, and 4 thereof, by renumbering sections 5 and 6 thereof as sections 6 and 7, respectively, and by substituting the following new sections:
"SECTION 1. Scope of order. This order shall apply (a) to the planning, construction, operation, and maintenance of all works of improvement under the authority of the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act (Public Law 566, approved August 4, 1954, as amended; 16 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.), hereinafter referred to as the Act, and (b) to other programs and projects of the Department of Agriculture, and to programs and projects of the Department of the Interior, the Department of the Army, and other Federal agencies to the extent that such programs or projects affect, or are affected significantly by, works of improvement provided for in the Act.
"SEC. 2. General administration. The Secretary of Agriculture shall have the following-described responsibilities under the Act:
"(a) Approval or disapproval of applications for Federal assistance in preparing plans for works of improvement, and the assignment of priorities for the provision of such assistance.
"(b) Establishing criteria for the formulation and justification of plans for works of improvement and criteria for the sharing of the cost of both structural and land-treatment measures which conform with the provisions of the Act and with policies established by or at the direction of the President for watershed protection, flood prevention, irrigation, drainage, water supply, and related water-resources development purposes.
"(c) Establishing engineering and economic standards and objectives, including standards as to degrees of flood protection, for works of improvement planned and carried out under the authority of the Act.
"(d) Determination and definition of
(1) those land-treatment measures and structural improvements for flood prevention and measures for the agricultural phases of conservation, development, use and disposal of water or for fish and wildlife development which are eligible for assistance under the Act, and
(2) the nature and extent of such assistance and the conditions under which such assistance shall be rendered.
"(e) Planning and installing works of improvement on lands under his jurisdiction, and arranging for the participation of other Federal agencies in the planning and installation of works of improvement on lands under their jurisdiction. Recommendations of the heads of other Federal agencies for necessary works of improvement on lands under their jurisdiction shall be submitted as an integral part of the plans of the Department of Agriculture for works of improvement. Arrangements for construction, operation, and maintenance of works of improvement on such lands shall be mutually satisfactory to the Secretary of Agriculture and the head of the Federal agency concerned.
"(f) Submitting plans for works of improvement to the State Governor or Governors concerned and to the Federal agencies concerned for review and comment when the Secretary and the interested local organization have agreed on such plans; and, when and as required by the Act, submitting such plans to the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Army for their review and comment prior to transmission of the plans to the Congress through the President.
"(g) Giving full consideration to the recommendations concerning the conservation and development of fish and wildlife resources contained in any report of the Secretary of the Interior which is submitted to him, in accordance with section 12 of the Act and section 5 of this order, prior to the time he and the local organization have agreed on a plan for works of improvement, and including in the plan such works of improvement for fish and wildlife purposes recommended in the report as are acceptable to him and the local organization.
"(h) Holding public hearings at suitable times and places when he determines that such action will further the purposes of the Act.
"SEC. 3. Notification. (a) The Secretary of Agriculture shall:
"(1) Notify in writing the State Governor or Governors concerned, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Army, and other Federal agencies concerned of his decision to initiate any survey or field investigation involving water-resources development work, and furnish them with appropriate information regarding the scope, nature, status, and results of such survey or investigation.
"(2) Notify the following, severally, in writing of all approvals or disapprovals of applications for planning assistance: the sponsoring organization, the State Governor or Governors concerned, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Army, and other Federal agencies concerned.
"(b) The Secretary of the Interior shall notify in writing the State Governor or Governors concerned, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of the Army, and other Federal agencies concerned of his decision to initiate any survey or field investigation involving water-resources development work, and furnish them with appropriate information regarding the scope, nature, status, and results of such survey or investigation.
"(c) The Secretary of the Army shall notify in writing the State Governor or Governors concerned, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of the Interior, and other Federal agencies concerned of his decision to initiate any survey or field investigation involving water-resources development work, and furnish them with appropriate information regarding the scope, nature, status, and results of such survey or investigation.
"SEC. 4. Coordination. In order to assure the coordination of work authorized under the Act and the related work of other agencies, so that the proper use, conservation, and development of water and related land resources through Federal programs and financial assistance may be achieved in the most orderly, economical, and effective manner,
"(a) The Secretary of Agriculture, before authorizing planning assistance in response to an application from a local organization for assistance under the Act, shall:
"(1) When an application applies to a watershed located in one of the seventeen western reclamation States or Hawaii and it appears that a major objective is the agricultural phases of the conservation, development, utilization, and disposal of water for irrigation purposes, request the views of the Secretary of the Interior concerning the feasibility of achieving equivalent irrigation benefits by means of works of improvement constructed pursuant to the Reclamation Act of June 17, 1902 (43 U.S.C. 391), and acts amendatory or supplementary thereto, or by means of assistance furnished pursuant to the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956, as amended (43 U.S.C. 422a-422k), and authorize planning assistance under the Act only after carefully considering whether works of improvement under the Act would be a more appropriate method of achieving that objective.
"(2) When it appears that a major objective of an application is the reduction of flood damages in urban areas (as defined in the most recent census), request the views of the Secretary of the Army concerning the feasibility of achieving equivalent urban flood protection benefits by means of works of improvement constructed pursuant to the Flood Control Act of March 1, 1917 (39 Stat. 948), the Flood Control Act of May 15, 1928 (45 Stat. 534), the Flood Control Act of June 22, 1936 (49 Stat. 1570), or acts amendatory or supplementary thereto, and authorize planning assistance under the Act only after carefully considering whether works of improvement under the Act would be a more appropriate method of achieving that objective.
"(3) When an application applies to a watershed located in the Tennessee River drainage basin, request the views of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority concerning the feasibility of achieving the objectives of the application by means of works of improvement for flood control or watershed protection constructed under the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933, as amended (16 U.S.C. 831 et seq.), and authorize planning assistance under the Act only after carefully considering whether works of improvement under the Act would be a more appropriate method of achieving such objectives; and when such planning assistance is authorized, consult with the Tennessee Valley Authority throughout all phases of project development concerning the relationship of works of improvement under the Act to the unified development and regulation of the Tennessee River system.
"(b) The Secretary of the Interior shall, prior to undertaking any survey or field investigation under the Reclamation Act of June 17, 1902 (43 U.S.C. 391), and acts amendatory or supplementary thereto, or prior to initiating investigations after receipt of a Notice of Intent to apply for a loan under the Small Reclamation Projects Act of 1956, as amended (43 U.S.C. 422a-422k), relating to works of improvement wholly within a watershed or subwatershed area of not more than 250,000 acres, request the views of the Secretary of Agriculture concerning the feasibility of achieving the major objectives of the project proposal by means of Federal assistance furnished pursuant to the Act, and submit a report on such a survey or field investigation or approve such application for assistance only after carefully considering whether works of improvement under his authorities would be a more appropriate method of achieving such objectives.
"(c) The Secretary of the Army shall, prior to undertaking any survey or field investigation pursuant to the Flood Control Act of March 1, 1917 (39 Stat. 948), the Flood Control Act of May 15, 1928 (45 Stat. 534), the Flood Control Act of June 22, 1936 (49 Stat. 1570), and acts amendatory or supplementary thereto, relating to works of improvement wholly within a watershed or subwatershed area of not more than 250,000 acres, request the views of the Secretary of Agriculture concerning the feasibility of achieving the major objectives of the project proposal by means of Federal assistance furnished pursuant to the Act, and submit a report on such survey or field investigation only after carefully considering whether works of improvement under his authorities would be a more appropriate method of achieving such objectives.
"(d) The Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority shall, prior to undertaking any survey or field investigation under the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933, as amended (16 II.S.C. 831 et seq.), relating to works of improvement for flood control or watershed protection to be installed wholly within a watershed or subwatershed area of not more than 250,000 acres, request the views of the Secretary of Agriculture concerning the feasibility of achieving the major objectives of the works of improvement for flood control or watershed protection by means of works of improvement constructed under the Act, and proceed with such survey or investigation only after carefully considering whether works of improvement under the Tennessee Valley Authority Act would be a more appropriate method of achieving such objectives.
"(e) Whenever the foregoing provisions of this section require an agency head to request the views of another agency head, such request shall be effected prior to the making of any commitment to local interests, and local interests shall be informed at the outset of negotiations that any plan resulting therefrom is subject to coordination as required by this section.
"(f) When any agency having responsibilities for water resources development is considering the initiation of surveys or field investigations in a watershed or subwatershed area of not more than 250,000 acres and it appears that the purposes to be served by the project under investigation could more advantageously be met by means of a combination of works of improvement under the statutory authority available to that and other agencies, the appropriate agency head shall consider with the other agency heads concerned and the cooperating local interests the feasibility of preparing a jointly developed plan for coordinated action under available statutory authority.
"SEC. 5. Fish and wildlife development. Upon receipt of the notice required by section 12 of the Act and section 3(a) (1) of this order, the Secretary of the Interior, as he desires, may make surveys and investigations and prepare a report with recommendations concerning the conservation and development of fish and wildlife resources and participate, under arrangements satisfactory to the Secretary of Agriculture, in the preparation of a plan for works of improvement which will be acceptable to the local organization and the Secretary of Agriculture."
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
January 18, 1961.