Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 19, 1960

Remarks at the Signing of the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security Between Japan and the United States.
THE SIGNING TODAY of the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between Japan and the United States is truly a historical occasion at which I am honored to be present. This treaty represents the fulfillment of the goal set by Prime Minister Kishi and myself in June of 1957 to establish an indestructible partnership between our two countries in which our relations would be based on complete equality and mutual understanding. The treaty likewise reflects the closeness and breadth of our relations in the political and economic as well as security fields.
It is equally fitting that the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security should be signed in the hundredth year after the first treaty between our two countries came into effect. On May 22, 1860, the first Japanese delegation to the United States exchanged ratifications of the Treaty of Amity and Commerce between our two countries. The subsequent hundred years have brought unbelievable progress and increasing prosperity to both our countries. It is my fervent hope that the new treaty signed today will usher in a second hundred years of prosperity and peace in freedom which the peoples of our countries and of all countries so earnestly desire.
Note: The ceremony was held in the East Room at the White House following the luncheon in honor of Prime Minister Kishi. The text of the treaty and related documents are published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 42, P. 184).
At the conclusion of the ceremony President Eisenhower presented Prime Minister Kishi with a reproduction of the original medal struck at the U.S. Mint in Philadelphia in 1860 commemorating the arrival of the first Japanese diplomatic mission.
On the following day the White House announced that Prime Minister Kishi had invited the President to visit Japan on the occasion of the Japanese-American Centennial, and that the President had accepted the invitation and would visit Japan about June 20.