Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 13, 1961

Letter Accepting Resignation of Gordon Gray as Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
Dear Gordon:
In accepting your resignation as my Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, effective January 20, 1961, as you request, I thank you not only for your outstanding service in this and earlier assignments, but also for your clear and thoughtful observations concerning the National Security Council.
You have been almost uniquely in position to know its value to me and to the vital work of assuring our country's security now and in the future. The Council itself has admirably fulfilled its function of advice and counsel at the top echelon of government, with thorough, searching and far-ranging debate and deliberation upon the great issues of U.S. national security. In addition, the Council has, as you say, served as the "capstone of mechanisms for assisting you in the formulation of policy and in assuring the timely and effective implementation of policy decisions taken by you." I am especially grateful for your report because somehow, despite our previous efforts, our people have not received an accurate and valid appreciation of the National Security Council's effectiveness--in which you and your predecessors, as well as your staff, have had such an important part.
But my appreciation to you does not stop with your current contribution to the work of the National Security Council, nor even with your previous distinguished service in prior positions. Over the whole wide range of security affairs, it has been a great help to me to have had, as one of my closest associates, a man of your wise understanding, integrity and dedication to our nation's interests. I deem myself, and our country, indeed fortunate.
To you and your fine family I extend my best wishes for happy and rewarding future years.
With warm regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Mr. Gray served as Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs from July 22, 1958, and as Chairman of the Operations Coordinating Board from January 13, 1960. Earlier he served as Assistant Secretary of Defense, as Defense member of the National Security Council Planning Board, and as Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization.
His letter of resignation, dated January 13, 1961, which includes his observations and report on the National Security Council and related organizations, was released with the President's reply.