Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 16, 1959

Statement by the President Following Announcement of Recipients of the President's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service.
THE DISTINGUISHED achievements of these Federal employees have contributed markedly to progress in law enforcement, foreign affairs, scientific research and missile development. Their accomplishments stand as a constant challenge and a lasting monument to the ingenuity and ability of Federal employees.
The strength of our Nation and its free institutions flows from the imagination, skill and special efforts of our people. All of us in positions of leadership in Government have an important responsibility to encourage the superior effort and constructive idea power that exists within the Federal service. These are the qualities that lead to progress. And progress is the necessary element in meeting the challenges of this age.
Note: The President made this statement in announcing his selection of the following persons to receive awards "for exceptional meritorious civilian service": James V. Bennett, Director, Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice, for "outstanding leadership in directing the Bureau of Prisons and in establishing policies to improve correctional treatment of offenders" Robert D. Murphy, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, for "resolving, with superlative diplomatic skill, many international crises that threatened the vital interests of the United States"; Doyle L. Northrup, Technical Director, Special Weapons Squadron, Department of the Air Force, for "his responsibility for the establishment of a network to detect atomic explosions anywhere in the world"; Hazel K. Stiebeling, Director, Institute of Home Economics, Department of Agriculture, for "her lasting contributions to the science of human nutrition and through this to the health of the American people"; and Wernher von Braun, Director, Development Operations Division, Army Ballistic Missile Agency, Department of the Army, for "his outstanding contributions in missile development and in the launching of the first United States satellite."
Gold medals were presented by the President to the award winners in a White House ceremony on January 20 at 10:30