Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 04, 1960

Exchange of New Year Greetings Between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Nikita S. Khrushchev

Chairman, Council of Ministers, U.S.S.R.

Klirnent Efrernovich Voroshilov

Chairman, Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R.
On behalf of the American people, I thank you for your kind New Year's message. I share the hope which you have expressed for a further improvement in the relations between our two countries. The United States seeks the achievement of a just and lasting peace in a world where all questions are settled by peaceful means alone. I can assure you that my Government will continue its best efforts to reach that goal. Please accept my good wishes for you and your families and the people of the Soviet Union for the coming year.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The message from Mr. Khrushchev and Mr. Voroshilov follows:
On the eve of the New Year we send to you, Mr. President, and to the people of the United States of America sincere greetings and best wishes from the peoples of the Soviet Union and from ourselves personally. It is possible to note with deep satisfaction that in the past year there were undertaken joint efforts in the search of ways for closer relations of our States, for ensurance of such a situation in which the unresolved international questions would be decided by peaceful means only. Entering the New Year, we would like to hope sincerely that these joint efforts will guarantee a new triumph of reason, and that a start will be made to solve the most important problem of our times--the general and complete disarmament and the liberation of mankind from the burden of armament.
Let this New Year be the year of a further improvement in the relations between our countries. The realization of this hope which is so dear to the hearts of both the Soviet and American peoples would undoubtedly bring nearer the time when, thanks to the efforts of both countries, the relations between them could be built on the foundation of enduring friendship and mutually advantageous cooperation for the good of our nations, for the good of peace in the entire world. It is exactly in this way that we evaluate the meaning of exchange visits by the leading statesmen of both countries. These meetings make it possible to ensure that historical turning point in the relations between our countries, as well as in the international situation as a whole, which leads to the deliverance of all people from the dread of a new war.
With best wishes for happiness and health to you personally and to your entire family.
N. KHRUSHCHEV
K. VOROSHILOV
The messages were released at Augusta, Ga.