Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 09, 1961

Remarks at the Vice President's Birthday Party.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice President, Mrs. Nixon, ladies and gentlemen:
This evening I was looking at my daily schedule and knowing that I was going to come to Dick's birthday party, I thought I would look and see what the staff had down on this particular spot, and the first thing I saw was that I was to go to a party and immediately after the first course I was to go home.
Well, I said, this is rather short shrift, isn't it, just to throw you out after the soup? And I said it wouldn't be polite for me to go, and secondly I would be hungry, and thirdly I wanted to be here for the party, and fourthly I wouldn't get to make a speech if I went that soon-and that is one thing I like to do, is talk to Republicans.
I wanted to pay my little tribute to one who has served his country well, and certainly in these long 8 years has been one of the mainstays of the Republican administration and to me personally has been not only an invaluable associate in Government but a warm friend.
So it is my privilege to present to him, on your behalf, a memento of his birthday. And of course another reason I wanted to come is because it's always fun to see one just having his 48th birthday. Isn't that something?
I am going to read to you the inscription that is on this beautiful little silver bowl--"Richard Milhous Nixon, Vice President of the United States of America, in grateful recognition of his devoted service to our country. January 9, 1961."
I should like to endorse the sentiment expressed on that bowl from the very depths of my heart. I shall never cease to be grateful to him for his loyalty, his absolute readiness to undertake any chore, no matter what the inconvenience to himself and to his family--and whenever he has undertaken such a chore, to perform it brilliantly and to the credit of the United States of America.
So it is an honor for me to present to you this bowl--after all, I am only an honorary member of this club, you know--so it is particularly a distinction for me, Dick. But I hope that this will always remind you that this room is filled with your friends, your admirers, and people that want for you and Pat the very best that this life has to offer.
Note: The President spoke at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington. His opening words "Mr. Chairman" referred to U.S. Representative B. Carroll Reece of Tennessee, President of the Capitol Hill Club which sponsored the dinner honoring the Vice President.