Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 20, 1959

Remarks of Welcome to President Frondizi of Argentina at the Washington National Airport.
Mr. President and Senora Frondizi:

It is a very great privilege and honor to welcome you here as the head of a great nation for whom our people feel the kindliest sentiments of deep friendship. It is particularly a privilege because this is the first time that the President of Argentina has come to our country while he is in office. So we take it that you are paying to our country a great compliment in the effort that you have made to visit and see something of our country.
I assure you that here you will find the warmest of welcomes because on the human side your country, as is ours, is hoping to promote those great values of freedom and life of all the people. And I am sure that because of that kinship in the appreciation of values, our people will look on this visit as the hope of both our countries that we will march forward in realization of those objectives more strongly and more tightly bound together.
I am sure that your visit can do nothing better than to strengthen the friendship between our two countries and to make certain of better cooperation between two nations who have so much in common.

It is a great privilege, I assure you, to have you and your lovely wife here in this Capital.
Note: President Frondizi responded (through an interpreter) as follows:
Mr. President:
With deep emotion as an American I arrive in this beautiful city which is your Capital to express personally the cordial feelings of friendship that unite our two Republics.
Although it is my privilege to be the first Argentine President to visit your great country, the links between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic have always been close and strong, ever since the first days of our existence as an independent nation. I thank you for the hospitality extended to me as one more expression of that friendship.
Mr. President, let me tell you of my sincere pleasure on making your acquaintance, a pleasure that is made even greater by the happy circumstance of today being the sixth anniversary of your Presidency.
As President of the Argentine Republic, I bring you the wishes of happiness of the Argentine people, who reaffirm, through me, their affection toward the great people of the United States of America.
Thank you, Mr. President.