Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 09, 1961

Executive Order 10902—Providing for the Issuance of Emergency Preparedness Orders by the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1958 (72 Stat. 1799), the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2061 et seq.), and section 301 of title 3 of the United States Code, and as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. In connection with carrying out the functions delegated or otherwise assigned to him by the provisions of Executive Order No. 10773 of July 1, 1958, as amended by Executive Order No. 10782 of September 6, 1958, or by the provisions of other orders thereby amended, the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization shall establish a series of civil-defense and defense-mobilization planning assignments which (1) shall be known as "Emergency Preparedness Orders," (2) shall, so far as practicable, be of uniform character, and (3) shall be designed to provide for the development of civil-defense and defense-mobilization plans and programs by the several departments and agencies of the executive branch of the Government to meet all conditions of national emergency, including attack upon the United States.
SEC. 2. The head of each department and agency assigned civil-defense and defense-mobilization functions by the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization in consonance with the provisions of section 1 of this order shall develop the plans and programs there referred to under the policy direction and central program control of the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization.
SEC. 3. Nothing in this order or in the National Plan for Civil Defense and Defense Mobilization shall be construed as conferring authority to put into effect any plan, procedure, policy, program, or other course of action prepared or developed pursuant to this order or the National Plan.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
January 9, 1961.