Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 01, 1958

Exchange of New Year Greetings Between the United States and the Soviet Union.
[Released January 1, 1958. Dated December 31, 1957]
His Excellency

Kliment Efremovich Voroshilov

Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet

Socialist Republics Moscow
In behalf of the American people, I reciprocate the greetings of yourself, Prime Minister Bulganin and Mr. Khrushchev. I hope that the peoples of the Soviet Union throughout the coming year may enjoy peace and those fundamentals of a more abundant life which are the aspirations of all mankind. I earnestly trust that the New Year will bring a firmer and better understanding between the citizens of the Soviet Union, the American people and those of other nations. You may be assured that the government of the United States will extend every effort to that end.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The Soviet leaders' message dated December 30, 1957, follows:
President Dwight D. Eisenhower
White House
Washington
On the eve of the New Year, we ask you, Mr. President to accept personally and to transmit to the people of the United States of America best wishes from the peoples of the Soviet Union and from us personally.
We express the hope that the forthcoming year will be a year of strengthening of friendship and cooperation between the peoples of the Soviet Union and of the United States of America, a year, when the great principles of peaceful coexistence, receiving ever greater international recognition, will become the basis of mutual relations between our states.
Dedicating our activities to the attainment of this noble goal, we wish to express our firm conviction that, uniting the strength of our states together with other countries, there is the possibility to realize the great, ardent dream of humanity--to create a final peace on earth, to create such conditions under which people would live in freedom from fear for their future, for the future of coming generations.
K. VOROSHILOV
N. KHRUSHCHEV
N. BULGANIN
The messages were released at Gettysburg, Pa.