Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 27, 1958

Remarks at Ceremony Marking the Tenth Anniversary of the Smith-Mundt Act.
Mr. Allen, Mr. Apaloo, distinguished Members of the United States Senate:
The Smith-Mundt Act was sponsored ten year ago by my good friends Senator Alexander Smith and Senator Karl Mundt who was then a Member of the House of Representatives. This Act forms the basic legislation for our government's overseas information and cultural exchange programs. These programs are an important part of our effort to convey to everybody in the world a simple basic truth: America wants peace.
I personally testified before Karl Mundt's Committee, as he mentioned, some ten years ago on behalf of this legislation. I believed in it then and I believe in it now.
Earlier, Senator William Fulbright had sponsored legislation to use the proceeds from the sale of some of our war material overseas for educational purposes. I am pleased that Senator Fulbright is also with us today and that the law which bears his name continues in force and vigor.
Even more than that, I most heartily endorse and support the sentiments that Senator Fulbright has just expressed. I believe, with him, that the exchange of students--to include under proper arrangements exchange of students coming from behind the Iron Curtain--should be vastly expanded. In my opinion that program could have no other effect than to increase understanding and to make more secure the peace--a just peace, that we all seek.
Information and education are powerful forces in support of peace. Just as war begins in the minds of men, so does peace.
The program supported by you three gentlemen will help to bring about international understanding, which is the surest way I know to bring about the lasting peace which the United States has always sought.
I think it is a very important meeting when all of these Senators have come here today with Mr. Allen, each of them testifying before the American people and before the world of the value of the peaceful efforts of the United States in these important fields.
Note: The President spoke in the Cabinet Room at the White House at 9:50 a.m. His opening words referred to George V. Allen, Director, United States Information Agency, and Lawrence K. Apaloo, Director of Technical Education of Ghana.