Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 22, 1960

Proclamation 3360—Modifying the Arches National Monument, Utah

Whereasthe Arches National Monument in Grand County, Utah, established by Proclamation No. 1875 of April 12, 1929, and enlarged by Proclamation No. 2312 of November 25, 1938, was reserved and set apart as an area containing extraordinary examples of wind-eroded sandstone formations and other geologic and prehistoric structures of historic and scientific interest; and
Whereasit appears that it would be in the public interest to add to the Arches National Monument certain contiguous lands on which outstanding geologic features of great scientific interest are situated, and certain other lands adjacent to the monument which are essential to the proper care, management, and protection of the objects of scientific interest situated on such lands and on lands now comprising a part of the monument; and
Whereasit appears that it would also be in the public interest to exclude from the monument certain lands in the southeast section thereof, contiguous to the Salt Wash escarpment, which are used for grazing and which have no known scenic or scientific value:
Now, Therefore, I, Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 2 of the act of June 8, 1906, 34 Stat. 225 (16 U.S.C. 431), and subject to valid existing rights, do proclaim as follows:
The lands now owned by the United States within the exterior boundaries of the following-described tracts of land are hereby added to and reserved as a part of the Arches National Monument; and lands owned by the State of Utah within such boundaries shall become and be reserved as a part of that monument upon acquisition of title thereto by the United States:
SALT LAKE MERIDIAN
T. 24 S., R. 21 E.,

Sec. 2, S 1/2;

Sec. 11, NE 1/4;

comprising 480 acres, more or less.
The following-described lands in the State of Utah are hereby excluded from the Arches National Monument:
SALT LAKE MERIDIAN
T. 24, S., R. 22 E.,

Sec. 17, E 1/2, E 1/2 NW 1/4;

Sec. 20, NE 1/4, N 1/2 SE 1/4, SE 1/4 SE 1/4;

Sec. 29, NE 1/4 NE 1/4;

comprising 720 acres, more or less.
The boundaries of the Arches National Monument are modified accordingly.
The public lands hereby excluded from the monument shall not be subject to application, location, settlement, entry, or other forms of appropriation under the public-land laws until further order of an authorized officer of the Department of the Interior.
Warning is hereby expressly given to all unauthorized persons not to appropriate, injure, destroy, or remove any feature of this monument and not to locate or settle upon any of the lands thereof.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this twenty-second day of July in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-fifth.


DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
By the President:

CHRISTIAN A. HERTER,

Secretary of State