Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 22, 1953

Statement by the President on a Proposed Amendment to the Constitution Relating to Treaties.
SENATOR KNOWLAND has today introduced a resolution to amend the Constitution of the United States. Its purpose is to assure that treaties entered into by the President and consented to by at least two-thirds of the Senate in behalf of the United States shall not override the Constitution. It provides that treaties and executive agreements shall not violate the Constitution, and that the courts may so declare; that in the future the Senate shall vote on treaties by recorded yeas and nays as is the case now with a vote on overriding a veto; and that the Senate may in each instance, when considering the ratification of a treaty, if it so determines, provide that it shall not be effective as internal law save by congressional action.
This resolution has my unqualified support.
Under our form of Government, the President has the duty to conduct foreign affairs. Every American knows this to be our traditional policy which has functioned so well during the lifetime of our Republic.
While I have opposed other amendments which would have had the effect of depriving the President of the capacity necessary to carry on negotiations with foreign governments, I am glad to support the Knowland Amendment for it confirms that this Presidential power cannot be used contrary to the Constitution.
All action of the President, either domestically or in foreign relations, must be within and pursuant to constitutional authority. Consequently I am unalterably opposed to any amendment which would change our traditional treaty making power or which would hamper the President in his constitutional authority to conduct foreign affairs. Today, probably as never before in our history it is essential that our country be able effectively to enter into agreements with other nations.
As President I have taken an oath to defend the Constitution. I therefore oppose any change which will impair the President's traditional authority to conduct foreign affairs. Senator Wiley and others who have joined in the defense of these constitutional powers so important to the integrity and safety of our nation, are entitled to commendation and support for their efforts.
It is my belief that the reassurances contained in the Knowland Amendment meet all legitimate demands that have been made in this field of foreign relations.