Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 03, 1958

Memorandum Concerning Proposed Agreement With the United Kingdom for Cooperation on Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defense
Memorandum for:

Secretary of Defense

Acting Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission
1. In your joint letter of July 3, 1958, to me, you recommended that I approve a proposed Agreement Between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland For Cooperation on the Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defense Purposes.
2. I note from your joint recommendation that the United Kingdom is participating with the United States in international arrangements pursuant to which it is making Substantial and material contributions to the mutual defense and security, and the United Kingdom has made substantial progress in the development of atomic weapons. I note also that the proposed Agreement will permit cooperation necessary to improve capabilities of the United States, and the United Kingdom, in the application of atomic energy for mutual defense purposes, subject to provisions, conditions, guaranties, terms, and special determinations, which are most appropriate in this important area of mutual assistance.
3. The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and the Agreement require certain determinations concerning cooperation under the Agreement. In this regard, I shall expect to have your recommendations with respect to an Executive Order which will facilitate the implementation of the Agreement as proposed in your joint letter.
4. Having considered the cooperation provided for in the Agreement, including your joint recommendation, security safeguards and other terms and conditions of the Agreement, I hereby
(a) Approve the program for transfer of one submarine nuclear propulsion plant and special nuclear material required for operation of this plant during the ten-year period following the date upon which the Agreement enters into force;
(b) Determine that the performance of this Agreement will promote and will not constitute an unreasonable risk to the common defense and security of the United States;

(c) Approve the proposed Agreement for Cooperation; and

(d) Authorize the execution of the proposed Agreement for the Government of the United States by the Secretary of State.
5. In taking these actions, I have noted also the supplementary classified information, regarding the Agreement, also jointly submitted to me.

6. After execution of the Agreement, I shall submit it to the Congress.

7. I am forwarding a copy of this memorandum to the Secretary of State.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The joint letter of July 3 and the text of the proposed Agreement are published in Senate Report 2041 (85th Cong., 2d sess.).