Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 03, 1955

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Prime Minister U Nu of Burma.
THE PRIME MINISTER of Burma, His Excellency U Nu, has visited Washington for three days at the invitation of President Eisenhower. The President and the Prime Minister discussed many matters of common concern and exchanged views on current international problems.
The Prime Minister, the President and the Secretary of State reviewed problems of peace and security in Asia. They had a frank discussion of the complex economic problems arising from the existence of substantial surpluses of exportable rice both in Burma--one of the world's leading rice exporting countries--and in the United States.
Note was taken of the salutary influence of religion as exemplified by the Sixth Buddhist Synod presently being held in Rangoon and attended by leading Buddhist scholars from many nations.
The problem of imprisoned American fliers in Communist China was reviewed.
These talks have been of special value in increasing mutual understanding between Burma and the United States. There is a wide area of agreement and a traditional friendship between Burma and the United States resting firmly upon certain noble concepts to which both countries subscribe. Our two peoples, those of the United States and the Union of Burma, share two fundamental goals, a peaceful world and a democratic way of life.
They reaffirmed their dedication to the ideal of peace and friendly cooperation amongst nations founded on international justice and morality. Both countries are deeply concerned with a subject that is predominant in the minds of all responsible world leaders today--the problem of achieving peace with justice, a peace based upon the liberty of human beings and the security of nations.
Such a peace can best be achieved by loyal steadfast support for the Charter of the United Nations. That is the surest and most practical avenue along which to seek peace with justice in this world. A patient striving to uphold the fundamental moral and religious beliefs underlying the Charter provides the best hope for the fulfillment of mankind's aspirations.
The Prime Minister, the President and the Secretary of State deplored the conditions which force the peoples of the world to divert their energies and talents from a single-minded effort to improve and expand those cultural and economic opportunities by which men can raise the levels of their existence. They renewed their own determination to uphold the principles of the United Nations in its unceasing effort to save mankind from the scourge of future war.