Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 25, 1957

Remarks to Delegates of Boys Nation.
THIS IS getting to be one of the pleasant annual events that takes place around the White House--my privilege of greeting representatives of Boys Nation. As I understand it, you organize your own government while you are here. I sometimes think I would like to see the laws and resolutions you pass and some of your debates and to see whether it wouldn't help some of us oldsters a little bit. We can certainly use some help with some of the problems we have these days.
In any event, this experience cannot fail to be of benefit to each of you all your lives. It seems to me, first, it will be an inspiration to continue your interest in your national government-to know what it is and make up your minds what it should be if it is to conform to constitutional precepts, admonitions and directions, where you think it has violated, and what you can do to get it in its proper perspective with respect to the rest of the nation.
More than inspiration, I think you are getting a better than usual education as to what this government is, what it does, and how it works. Possibly you are getting a more than normal understanding of the proper relationship between the Federal government and the State government and municipal government and the individual. All of those things, in no matter what direction your life's efforts may lie, will be valuable to you, whether you are a business man, a teacher, a minister, a professional man, no matter what you are. These things will be valuable and the more so that you apply the knowledge and the understanding you have gained all through your lives.
So when I welcome you here, it is not merely because I like to see a bunch of young fellows. That is part of it. Also I welcome you to what I believe to be the opening up of a broader vista of understanding for you--and therefore for the benefit of the United States of America.
Thank you a lot, and I hope you have a good time while you are here.
Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden.