Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 10, 1956

Letter to Clarence B. Randall on His Appointment as Special Assistant to the President for Foreign Economic Policy.
Dear Mr. Randall:
I am delighted that you have agreed to serve as Special Assistant to the President in the area of foreign economic policy and that you will be taking up the work of your able predecessor in assisting and advising me in the orderly development of foreign economic policy and programs. I shall count on you to assure the effective coordination of foreign economic matters of concern to the several departments and agencies of the Executive Branch, and to effect a further simplification of the present administrative and coordinating structure in this field.
In this capacity you will assume the chairmanship of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy, whose membership consists of the Secretaries of State, Treasury, Agriculture, and Commerce, and the Director of the International Cooperation Administration, or their principal deputies, also my Administrative Assistant for Economic Affairs, my Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, and a member of my Council of Economic Advisers. The heads of other departments and agencies should continue to be invited by the chairman to participate in meetings of the Council when matters of direct concern to them are under consideration.
As a part of this mission, I shall look to you and your associates for the development of foreign economic policies and programs designed to meet the special problems created by Communist economic activities in underdeveloped areas of the free world.
So that you may be fully advised on the foreign activities and problems of the Government, you are invited to attend pertinent meetings of the Cabinet and the National Security Council. I shall expect you to establish appropriate working relations with the National Security Council, the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems, and other relevant groups as necessary to assure that the formulation of foreign economic policy is properly integrated with the formulation of national security policy, international financial policy, and domestic economic policy.
You may provide yourself with such staff as is necessary to assist you in connection with these duties. In addition, you may need to make provision from time to time for a limited number of special task forces for the review of specific foreign economic matters.
Needless to say, I am very glad that you are continuing your service in the field of foreign economic policy where you have already made such a notable contribution. In the critical but hopeful years ahead we must continue to act constructively in this vital field in order that the cause of a just peace may be substantially advanced.
With warm regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This letter was released at Gettysburg, Pa.