Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 19, 1958

Message to the United States Forces in Lebanon and the Mediterranean Area.
[Recorded on film and tape for broadcast over the Armed Forces Radio on July 19 and July 20]
THIS IS the President.

I am talking to you from my office in the White House.
I want to speak personally to the officers and men of our forces-Marines, Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen--who are now in Lebanon, on the Mediterranean Sea, or in the skies over that area.
You are in Lebanon because the United States has responded to an urgent request from Lebanon, a friendly country, for help in preserving its cherished independence which has been gravely threatened. Lebanon is a free nation--properly proud of its history and its traditions. The Lebanese people--like us--want only to live in peace and in freedom. They do not want to impose their will on any other people; they do not want to conquer or enslave any other nation.
But unfortunately their hopes and aspirations to remain free are now threatened. A large part of that threat comes from outside forces which have sent men and munitions into Lebanon to help in destroying its democratic government, based upon free popular elections.
Lebanon had no recourse but to appeal for assistance. Their President, with the unanimous approval of the Cabinet, asked me to help them maintain their independence. After careful consideration and consultation with the leaders of our Congress, I decided that the appeal for help had to be honored--that unless Lebanon received help, pending necessary enlarged United Nations support which could not be immediately furnished, it would cease to exist as a free and independent country. You are helping the Lebanese people to remain free.
You are there at their invitation--as friends--to preserve for them the same freedoms that we have here at home.
As your first elements were landing on the beaches of Lebanon, your government was taking action in the United Nations in an attempt to get increased United Nations effort to help the Lebanon Republic to protect its freedom. We have not yet succeeded in this attempt, but we will persevere.
As soon as the independence and integrity of Lebanon are secure, then you and your comrades will be withdrawn immediately from the country.
While you are in Lebanon, each of you is a personal representative of the United States--a symbol of the national aspirations for freedom for all people.
While on this duty you may be assailed by propaganda whipped up by skillful and ambitious men. There may be deliberate attempts to involve you as units--or individually--in incidents which will be greatly exaggerated by these propagandists to suit their own purposes.
Through it all, just remember you are representing the United States of America--that you are true to her ideals in helping a people to keep their freedom. We have no hostile intent toward any people anywhere in the world.

It will be a trying time for all of you. I know that.
But I also know that you are American servicemen, trained to do your duty to your country.
Right now, the performance of that duty is the greatest contribution you can make to the peace of the world--the saving of the freedom of a small and friendly country.

Through me our people here at home thank you. God bless you all !