Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 31, 1958

Statement by the President Concerning the Second International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
WE HAVE BEEN discussing here the progress being made on the plans for United States participation in the Second International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. It has been a stimulating account. I am proud that the United States has been so closely connected with this great project.
Since it was first realized that the atom could bring great benefits to mankind, the United States has persistently and continuously worked to turn this new resource from warlike to peaceful purposes. These efforts were born of a deep conviction that, along with every other nation of the world, we had a moral responsibility to do this.
We hope that it soon may be possible to dedicate the atom solely to peaceful pursuits and hasten the unlimited blessings it holds for all nations and all peoples. As the first nation to develop the fission process, world leadership in this great endeavor is imposed upon us.
The United Nations, acting on our proposal, undertook a program to further the peaceful uses of atomic energy throughout the world. The International Atomic Energy Agency and the organization of six Western European countries, known as Euratom, are first evidences of the successful development of this program.
The first Peaceful Uses Conference held in Geneva in 1955 under United Nations auspices resulted in significant advances along the entire front of nuclear science.
As we go into the Second Peaceful Uses Conference this September, we are encouraged by the results to date. We are determined to continue to make our full contribution along with other nations. The progress which our own scientists have made will be reported to the conference. Our latest discoveries will be added to the growing body of scientific literature in this vast new field. Our exhibits will give visual evidence of our progress. The scientific community of the world will gain much from the first-hand discussions and exchanges of information.
Let us all pray that Almighty God may decree the success of this cooperative effort for the welfare and happiness of all mankind.