Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 25, 1957

Letters for Inclusion With Passports of Citizens Travelling or Serving Abroad.
LETTER TO CIVILIANS
Dear Fellow Citizen:
You have been issued a valued credential--the Passport of the United States. It requests that, in the countries you intend to visit, there be provided you, as an American citizen, safe passage, lawful aid and protection in case of need. As the holder of this passport, you will be the guest of our neighbors and friends in the world family of nations.
Year after year, increasing numbers of our citizens travel to foreign countries. In most of these lands there exist a reservoir of good will for the United States and a knowledge of what we stand for. In some areas, our country and its aspirations are less well understood. To all the varied peoples of these many countries, you, the bearer of an American passport, represent the United States of America.
As you travel abroad, the respect you show for foreign laws and customs, your courteous regard for other ways of life, and your speech and manner help to mold the reputation of our country. Thus, you represent us all in bringing assurance to the people you meet that the United States is a friendly nation and one dedicated to the search for world peace and to the promotion of the well-being and security of the community of nations.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
LETTER TO MEMBERS OF ARMED FORCES
Dear Fellow Citizen:
As a member of our Armed Forces stationed overseas, you and your dependents are representatives of the American people with the essential mission of building good will for our country.
Service men and women are the largest group of official U. S. personnel stationed in foreign countries. As a result, people form their personal attitudes toward our country and our American way of life to a great extent by what they see and hear about American service personnel and their dependents.
As you serve abroad, the respect you show foreign laws and customs, your courteous regard for other ways of life, and your speech and manner help to mold the reputation of our country. Thus, you represent us all in bringing assurance to the people you meet that the United States is a friendly nation and one dedicated to the search for world peace and to the promotion of the well-being and security of the community of nations.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER