Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 10, 1954

Statement by the President Upon Signing the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954
I AM HAPPY to sign today the Agricultural Trade and Development Act of 1954. It is an essential part of the comprehensive agricultural program which I recommended to the Congress on January 11, 1954. In the face of burdensome and growing stocks of agricultural products, the Administration urged the enactment of legislation providing for flexible price supports and other measures designed to check the accumulation of surpluses. We recommended that the burdensome stocks which had already accumulated be liquidated over a period of time, through disposal programs that would create new markets for United States products, and assist friendly countries.
The Agricultural Trade and Development Act is well designed for its purpose of "providing a means whereby surplus agricultural commodities in excess of the usual marketings of such commodities may be sold." It will lay the basis for a permanent expansion of our exports of agricultural products, with lasting benefits to ourselves and peoples in other lands. The Act also provides authority to give surpluses to meet famine and other emergency requirements, thus enabling us to maintain our American tradition of generous help in time of need.
The Act wisely sets forth the intention of the Congress that it shall expand world trade on a sound basis, and not disrupt it. I am glad that this makes it possible for me to assure normal suppliers to commercial markets at home and abroad that the Act will be administered so that the United States will not be engaging in unfair competition or in other practices which would disturb world markets. Such disturbance to. markets would not only cause serious harm to other countries but would harm us most of all, since we are the world's largest exporter. Thus, in following our own broad interests, we shall be reflecting our responsibilities as a member of the family of nations.
NOTE: The Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 is Public Law 480, 83d Congress (68 Stat. 454).