Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 15, 1953

Letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives Transmitting a Proposed Supplemental Appropriation for the Department of Agriculture.
Sir:
I have the honor to transmit herewith for the consideration of the Congress a proposed supplemental appropriation for the fiscal year 1954 in the amount of $150,000,000 for the Department of Agriculture.
The Congress is already aware of the urgent necessity for immediate consideration of an appropriation of funds to implement the administration bill which I have signed, providing additional authority for emergency assistance to farmers and stockmen. The cumulative effect of continued drought in the Southwest during the past four years has created an unprecedented need for emergency credit and feed, in order to prevent serious damage to a major part of our agricultural economy.
I have been kept currently informed by the Secretary of Agriculture and through personal conferences with congressional leaders and representatives of the livestock industry. As you know, I have also made a personal inspection of the area and have met with the Governors of the six States designated as drought-disaster areas. This firsthand knowledge of the problems involved and the terrible consequences of the drought have impressed me with the courage and self-reliance of the people in these areas and their determination to work out their own salvation as fully as they can. I am no less impressed with their desperate need for help.
I wish to assure the Congress that the executive branch will continue to employ fully the resources available in assisting in the emergency. The States, local governments, and individuals involved, however, should strive to do everything possible within their power to overcome the situation and minimize the necessity for Federal aid.
Details of the proposed supplemental appropriation are set forth in the attached letter from the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, with whose comments and observations thereon I concur.
Respectfully yours,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The letter was addressed to the Honorable Joseph W. Martin, Jr., Speaker of the House of Representatives. The attachment, also released, is published in House Document 208 (83d Cong., 1st sess.).
A supplemental appropriation was approved July 31, 1953 (67 Stat. 297).