Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 13, 1957

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Prime Minister Suhrawardy of Pakistan.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States and the Prime Minister of Pakistan concluded today their series of discussions on a wide range of problems involving the maintenance of freedom and security. These discussions have been supplemented by further discussions between the Prime Minister and his advisers and the Secretary of State, and also meetings with the Secretary of Defense and other American officials.
The Prime Minister addressed both Houses of the United States Congress. After leaving Washington, the Prime Minister will visit other parts of the United States and meet with various political, cultural and business leaders.
I.
The President and the Prime Minister reviewed the steady growth of close, cooperative relations between their two countries. These relations are securely founded on mutual respect and trust between equal sovereign nations determined to maintain their independence by working together for peace and progress. They examined various joint programs which serve further to strengthen these ties.
The President and the Prime Minister agreed that international communism continues to pose the major threat to the security of the free world. They reaffirmed their determination to support and strengthen the systems of collective security which have been forged in Asia. They reiterated their determination to oppose aggression. It was recognized that this determination, expressed in such organizations as the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and the Baghdad Pact, as well as through the Mutual Security Agreement between Pakistan and the United States, has acted as a powerful deterrent to Communist aggression and has promoted stability in the treaty areas.
They expressed the belief that an effective international agreement on disarmament under adequate and effective international safeguards would contribute not only to the security of the world but also to its material progress.
They discussed the threat to the security and integrity of the nations of the Middle East resulting from the intrusion of Communist influence and subversion in that area. It was agreed that the United States and Pakistan would continue to exert their influence to promote conditions in the Middle East which will permit the nations of the area to work out their national destinies in freedom and peace.
The Prime Minister referred to Pakistan's disputes with India over Kashmir and the distribution of the waters of the Indus River and its tributaries. The Prime Minister said that Pakistan desires to settle such disputes peacefully and in conformity with international law and the decisions of the United Nations. The President expressed the hope that such regional disputes may be solved speedily, equitably, and permanently, in accordance with the principles of the United Nations. As regards the Indus waters, they welcomed the efforts of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to find a solution acceptable to the two parties concerned.
II.
The President and the Prime Minister discussed economic and commercial relations between the United States and Pakistan. They looked with satisfaction on the many measures taken individually and jointly in recent years to expand trade, increase investment, and enlarge the flow of technical information between the two countries. They agreed to give consideration to additional measures designed to strengthen the economic well-being of Asia.
The Prime Minister emphasized the serious financial pressures placed on his country by its efforts to undertake essential development projects, while at the same time maintaining its security forces. He reviewed Pakistan's efforts to achieve financial stability without undue dependence on foreign aid. The President expressed his understanding of the problems facing Pakistan, citing the substantial quantities of United States economic and military assistance as concrete evidence of United States recognition of these difficulties.
The Prime Minister renewed Pakistan's request to purchase additional amounts of food grains under the terms of the United States Surplus Agricultural Products Disposal program. The President assured the Prime Minister that Pakistan's minimum requirements would be given sympathetic and expeditious consideration and would be met contingent upon the enactment of the extended program by Congress.
III.
The President and the Prime Minister stated their conviction that the present exchange of views has further strengthened the mutual understanding and cooperation of their two countries. They expressed their desire to undertake further steps to increase this close relationship.