Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 19, 1953

Statement by the President Declining To Intervene on Behalf of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
SINCE ITS original review of the proceedings in the Rosenberg case by the Supreme Court of the United States, the Courts have considered numerous further proceedings Challenging the Rosenbergs' conviction and the sentence imposed. Within the last two days, the Supreme Court, convened in a special session, has again reviewed a further point which one of the Justices felt the Rosenbergs should have an opportunity to present. This morning the Supreme Court ruled that there was no substance to this point. 1
1 346 U.S. 273, 322, 324.
I am convinced that the only conclusion to be drawn from the history of this case is that the Rosenbergs have received the benefit of every safeguard which American justice can provide. There is no question in my mind that their original trial and the long series of appeals constitute the fullest measure of justice and due process of law. Throughout the innumerable complications and technicalities of this case, no judge has ever expressed any doubt that they committed most serious acts of espionage.
Accordingly, only most extraordinary circumstances would warrant executive intervention in the case.
I am not unmindful of the fact that this case has aroused grave concern both here and abroad in the minds of serious people, aside from the considerations of law. In this connection, I can only say that, by immeasurably increasing the chances of atomic war the Rosenbergs may have condemned to death tens of millions of innocent people all over the world. The execution of two human beings is a grave matter. But even graver is the thought of the millions of dead whose deaths may be directly attributable to what these spies have done.
When democracy's enemies have been judged guilty of a crime as horrible as that of which the Rosenbergs were convicted;-when the legal processes of democracy have been marshalled to their maximum strength to protect the lives of convicted spies;-when in their most solemn judgment the tribunals of the United States have adjudged them guilty and the sentence just, I will not intervene in this matter.