Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 21, 1957

Joint Statement Following Discussions With the Prime Minister of Japan.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States and the Prime Minister of Japan concluded today valuable discussions on topics of interest to both countries. Their talks focused mainly on United States-Japanese relations but they also discussed international subjects of mutual concern, especially the situation in Asia.
During his three-day visit the Prime Minister and members of his party met at length with the Secretary of State and also met with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Commerce, the Chairman of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, the President of the Export-Import Bank and appropriate representatives of the President and of the Departments of Defense and Agriculture, and with leaders of the United States Congress. After leaving Washington, the Prime Minister will visit other parts of the United States and meet with leaders of business and other private organizations.
I.
The President and the Prime Minister agreed that, although the dangers of general war had somewhat receded, international communism remains a major threat. Accordingly, they agreed that the free nations should continue to preserve their strength and their unity. It was mutually recognized that the deterrent power of the free world had, in recent years, been effective in preventing overt aggression in the Far East and the world.
The President and the Prime Minister are convinced that relations between Japan and the United States are entering a new era firmly based on common interests and trust. Their discussions covered the many mutual advantages and benefits of close relations between the United States and Japan. The President and the Prime Minister decided, therefore, that it would be appropriate to affirm the following principles of cooperation between the two countries:
1) Relations between the United States and Japan rest on a solid foundation of sovereign equality, mutual interest and cooperation beneficial to both nations. In the years ahead, this relationship will provide a vital element in strengthening the Free World.
2) Both nations are dedicated to peace based on liberty and justice in accordance with the principles of the United Nations. They are resolved to work toward the establishment of conditions under which peace and freedom can prevail. To this end they will support the United Nations and contribute their best efforts to preserve and enhance the unity of the Free World. They will oppose the use of force by any nation except in individual or collective self-defense as provided in the United Nations Charter.
3) In the interests of continued peace, the Free World must maintain its defensive capability until armaments are brought under effective control. Meanwhile, the free nations need to intensify their efforts to foster the conditions necessary for economic and social progress and for strengthening freedom in Asia and throughout the world. Free Asian nations, which desire assistance, should be aided in carrying forward measures for economic development and technical training.
4) The United States and Japan reaffirm the desirability of a high level of world trade beneficial to free nations and of orderly trade between the two countries, without unnecessary and arbitrary restrictions.
5) The two countries fully agree that an effective international agreement for the reduction of armaments, both nuclear and conventional, is of crucial importance for the future of the world. They will continue in close consultation on this important problem.
Within the context of these principles the President and the Prime Minister reviewed the great changes which have taken place in Japan in recent years, including Japan's extensive economic recovery and admission to the United Nations, both of which the President warmly welcomed.
II.
Existing security arrangements between the United States and Japan were discussed. It was agreed to establish an intergovernmental committee to study problems arising in relation to the Security Treaty including consultation, whenever practicable, regarding the disposition and employment in Japan by the United States of its forces. The committee will also consult to assure that any action taken under the Treaty conforms to the principles of the United Nations Charter. The President and the Prime Minister affirmed their understanding that the Security Treaty of 1951 was designed to be transitional in character and not in that form to remain in perpetuity. The Committee will also consider future adjustments in the relationships between the United States and Japan in these fields adequate to meet the needs and aspirations of the peoples of both countries.
The United States welcomed Japan's plans for the buildup of her defense forces and accordingly, in consonance with the letter and spirit of the Security Treaty, will substantially reduce the numbers of United States forces in Japan within the next year, including a prompt withdrawal of all United States ground combat forces. The United States plans still further reductions as the Japanese defense forces grow.
The President, while recognizing that Japan must trade to live, stressed the continuing need for control on exports of strategic materials to those countries threatening the independence of free nations through the extension of international communism. The Prune Minister, while agreeing with the need for such control in cooperation with other Free World governments, pointed out the necessity for Japan to increase its trade.
The Prime Minister emphasized the strong desire of the Japanese people for the return of administrative control over the Ryukyu and Bonin Islands to Japan. The President reaffirmed the United States position that Japan possesses residual sovereignty over these islands. He pointed out, however, that so long as the conditions of threat and tension exist in the Far East the United States will find it necessary to continue the present status. He stated that the United States will continue its policy of improving the welfare and well-being of the inhabitants of the Islands and of promoting their economic and cultural advancement.
Economic and trade relations between the United States and Japan were discussed at length. The President and the Prime Minister mutually confirmed not only the desire for a high level of trade but also the need for close relations between the two countries in other economic fields. The Prime Minister, while expressing his deep concern over certain movements in the United States for import restrictions, explained that in consideration of the predominant importance of the United States market for Japanese trade Japan is taking measures for an orderly development of her exports to the United States. The President confirmed that the United States Government will maintain its traditional policy of a high level of trade without unnecessary and arbitrary restrictions. He expressed his hopes for the removal of local restrictions on the sale of Japanese products.
The Prime Minister described his recent tour of certain Asian countries and said that he had been deeply impressed with the serious efforts these countries are making toward economic development. He expressed his conviction that further progress in the economic development of these countries would greatly contribute to stability and freedom in Asia. The President expressed his full agreement with the Prime Minister. The President and the Prime Minister discussed ways in which free Asian countries might be further assisted in developing their economies. The views of the Prime Minister will be studied by the United States.
The President and the Prime Minister discussed the early cessation of both the testing and the manufacture of nuclear weapons as part of a first step in a safeguarded disarmament program. The President told the Prime Minister that the latter's views are being taken into account in formulating the United States position at the current United Nations disarmament session in London.
The President and the Prime Minister are convinced that their exchange of views will contribute much to strengthening mutual understanding and to agreement on fundamental interests which will further solidify the friendly relations between the two countries in the years to come.