Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 17, 1957

Executive Order 10716—Administration of the International Cultural Exchange and Trade Fair Participation Act of 1956
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the International Cultural Exchange and Trade Fair Participation Act of 1956 (70 Stat. 778), by section 301 of title 3 of the United States Code, and as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. United States Information Agency. (a) Except in respect of the functions delegated by section 2 (c), or reserved by section 4, of this order, the Director of the United States Information Agency shall coordinate the functions provided for in the International Cultural Exchange and Trade Fair Participation Act of 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) and shall be responsible for advising the President and keeping him informed with respect to the said functions:
(b) The following-designated functions conferred upon the President by the Act are hereby delegated to the Director of the United States Information Agency:
(1) The functions so conferred by the provisions of section 3 (2) of the Act (the provisions of section 2 (b) of this order notwithstanding).
(2) The functions so conferred by section 3 (4) of the Act (the provisions of sections 2 (d) and 3 (b) of this order notwithstanding).
(3) The functions so conferred by section 11 of the Act, except to the extent that such functions are delegated by section 2 (c) of this order.
(4) The functions so conferred by sections 4, 6, and 7 of the Act to the extent that they pertain to the functions delegated by the foregoing provisions of this section.
(c) The Director of the United States Information Agency, with such assistance of the Department of State and the Department of Commerce as may be appropriate, shall prepare and transmit to the President the reports which the President is required to transmit to the Congress by section 9 of the Act.
(d) The Director of the United States Information Agency shall consult with the Secretary of State or the Secretary of Commerce, or both, in connection with the establishment of any inter-agency committees under the authority delegated by section 1 (b) (3) of this order the activities of which will pertain to functions delegated by section 2 or section 3 of this order, or both, respectively.
(e) Funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the President to carry out the purposes of the Act shall be allocated by the Director of the United State Information Agency to the Department of State as may be necessary to carry out the functions delegated under section 2 of this order; to the Department of Commerce as may be necessary to carry out the functions delegated under section 3 of this order; and to such other departments or agencies of the Government as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act. The agencies to which funds are so allocated shall obtain apportionments thereof directly from the Bureau of the Budget.
SEC. 2. Department of State. Subject to the provisions of sections 1 (a) and 4 of this order, the following-designated functions conferred upon the President by the Act are hereby delegated to the Secretary of State:
(a) The functions so conferred by sections 3 (1), 10 (b), and 10 (c) (3) of the Act.
(b) The functions so conferred by section 3 (2) of the Act (the provisions of section 1 (b) (1) of this order notwithstanding).
(c) The functions so conferred by section 3 (3) of the Act to the extent that they pertain to the Universal and International Exhibition of Brussels, 1958, together with the functions so conferred by section 11 of the Act to the extent that they pertain to the said Exhibition.
(d) The functions so conferred by sections 3 (4), 4, 6, and 7 of the Act to the extent that they pertain to the functions delegated by the foregoing provisions of this section.
SEC. 3. Department of Commerce. Subject to the provisions of sections 1 (a) and 4 of this order, the following-designated functions conferred upon the President by the Act are hereby delegated to the Secretary of Commerce:
(a) The functions so conferred by section 3 (3) of the Act, exclusive of functions pertaining to the Universal and International Exhibition of Brussels, 1958.
(b) The functions so conferred by sections 3 (4), 4, 6, and 7 of the Act to the extent that they pertain to the functions delegated by the foregoing provisions of this section.
SEC. 4. Functions reserved to the President. There are hereby excluded from the functions delegated by the provisions of this order the functions conferred upon the President (a) with respect to the appointment of officers authorized to be appointed by the first proviso of section 3 (3) of the Act, (b) with respect to the transmittal of periodic reports to the Congress under section 9 of the Act, and (c) with respect to the waiver of provisions of law or limitations of authority under section 8 of the Act.
SEC. 5. Procedures for coordination abroad. The provisions of Part II of Executive Order No. 10575 of November 6, 1954 (19 F. R. 7249), are hereby extended and made applicable to the functions provided for in the Act and to United States agencies and personnel concerned with the administration abroad of the said functions.
SEC. 6. Definition. As used in this order, the word "functions" embraces duties, powers, responsibilities, authority, and discretion.
SEC. 7. Prior directives and actions. This order supersedes the provisions of the letters of the President to the Director of the United States Information Agency dated August 16, 1955, and August 21, 1956, and the letter of the President to the Secretary of State dated December 27, 1956 (22 P. R. 101-103); provided that this order shall not operate to terminate any authority to perform functions without regard to the provisions of law and limitations of authority specified in those letters. Except to the extent that they may be inconsistent with law or with this order, other directives, regulations, and actions relating to the functions delegated by this order and in force immediately prior to the issuance of this order shall remain in effect until amended, modified, or revoked by appropriate authority.
SEC. 8. Effective date. Without prejudice to anything done under proper authority with respect to any function under the Act at any time subsequent to the approval of the Act and prior to the issuance of this order, the effective date of this order shall be deemed to be the date on which the Act was approved.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
June 17, 1957.