Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 20, 1957

Remarks to the Young Republican National Federation.
My Friends:
To say that I am pleased to be with you this evening is to pitch my real feelings in a very low tone indeed. Speaking for at least three people in the box on that side, for Pat Nixon, for Mamie Eisenhower and me, I can assure you we have had a wonderful time. Not only have we enjoyed every bit of the entertainment, but the feeling of being with you--young Americans, who are here because they believe in something, believe in something that they know is good for America. They have come here to consult one with the other, to confer about the problems of the day and to go home to carry on the good fight for America.
I am not going to detain you long, but I just want to say one thing about fighting: No pessimistic general ever won a battle. There is enough pessimism in fights without the leader showing it.
So I say to you: Do not be satisfied just with the cause for which you fight, do not be satisfied knowing that you are giving the best that is in you. But you must do it with a smile on your faces--because there is no greater privilege than working for the United States of America.
And through your dedication, through the years, you will, by your example, even more than by your words, attract additional thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions, to the Party that represents soundness in all governmental dealings, with never-failing concern for every last human being in America, no matter what his religion or the color of his skin.
That, as I see it, is Republicanism.
Living in that way, I am certain your lives will be richer, not only because you will make the country a better one in which to live, but because you will have that great satisfaction that you helped build it. The greatest creation that you can have or that you can deliver to society is that part that you have in making this country great--for you--for your associates--for those who will come after you, and bringing about a world of peace-and a land of justice and of plenty. That is what all of you will work for.
That is why I am so proud of this Citation that was read to me this evening. Literally, to think that this convention should adopt such a resolution unanimously, brought tears to my eyes.
God bless you all. Good night.
Note: The President spoke at Constitution Hall. The text of the citation referred to follows:
TO PRESIDENT
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
We, the participants in the 10th Young Republican National Convention, speaking for the hundreds of thousands of Young Republicans and the millions of young Americans who feel as we, take this opportunity of expressing to you, Mr. President, our appreciation for the dedicated leadership you have been giving to this nation and to free peoples everywhere.
Mindful of the real sources of strength of our society, striving ever to unite our people, and always acting in accordance with principle, you have renewed the faith of our generation in our national heritage and our institutions of government.
Our tribute to you, Mr. President, is to pledge ourselves to emulate your dedication to service and to support your leadership for peace and progress.