Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 05, 1957

Message to General of the Army George C. Marshall on the Tenth Anniversary of His Address Setting Forth the Marshall Plan
[Released June 5, 1957. Dated June 3, 1957]
Dear General Marshall:
Only ten years ago, the nations of free Europe stood on the brink of economic collapse and political chaos. Millions of men and women who had fought and suffered in World War II to regain peace and freedom were confronted by a new danger infinitely more complex but no less terrifying than war itself. The fate of all Western Civilization hung in the balance, and there were many to whom disaster seemed inevitable. That this tragedy was averted is due in large measure to the bold and imaginative undertaking which you proposed and which rightfully bears your name.
Today, on the tenth anniversary of the pronouncement that launched this undertaking, free Europe has recovered a remarkable degree of economic health, accompanied by an upsurge in political stability, military power, and spiritual vitality.
As the world today looks ahead to the troublesome problems of the future, we can take courage and confidence from our experience in this program--from the proven demonstration that even the most intricate of human problems are soluble--from the knowledge that mankind is still capable of moving forward with imagination and faith to build a safer and happier world.
I trust that you feel great pride in the success of the European Recovery Program. I assure you that the American people have a deep appreciation of what you did for them in proposing and designing that program.
With best wishes for your continued health and happiness,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: A ceremony honoring General Marshall was held at the President's Guest House. The President went there after his morning news conference, greeted General and Mrs. Marshall, and posed for photographs with them. He then returned to the White House. His message was read by Wiley T. Buchanan, Jr., Chief of Protocol, Department of State.