Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 24, 1959

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives Transmitting Report "The Organization and Administration of the Military Assistance Program."
Dear Mr. :
I transmit for the consideration of the Congress a report on the Organization and Administration of the Military Assistance Program, submitted to the President on June 3, 1959, by the President's Committee to Study the United States Military Assistance Program.
I am in full agreement with the basic concepts enumerated by the Committee in its letter, and urge that the Congress provide for continuing authorizations for the Military Assistance Program, and hereafter make appropriations for military assistance to the Secretary of Defense under a separate title in the Department of Defense budget. In addition, I believe that legislative action along the lines suggested by the Executive Branch is necessary to clarify the responsibilities of the Departments of State and Defense in the administration of the Military Assistance Program.
The remainder of the principal recommendations in the Committee's letter largely pertain to administrative actions which could be taken within the Executive Branch without additional legislative authorization. These proposals as I interpret them are acceptable to me, and the appropriate executive agencies are now studying them and will make appropriate recommendations for my early consideration and approval with respect to their implementation.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Richard M. Nixon, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable Sam Rayburn, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The Committee's letter and report of June 3, 1959, are published in House Document 186 (86th Cong., 1st sess.). This is the Committee's second interim report; see also Items 90, 137, 170, and 183.
The basic concepts in the Committee's letter, to which the President refers, are quoted in Item 137, below.