Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 09, 1957

Remarks at the Ground-Breaking for the School of International Service, American University.
President Anderson, and members of the American University family and their friends:
It is indeed an honor to be present when a significant step is being taken in establishing this school for preparing young men and women for international service.
I have been informed that the Methodist Church is assisting markedly in this effort by donating a large sum of money for that purpose. It seems to me most significant that this great University should join her sister institution in the Capital, Georgetown, to carry on this kind of work, because in the great foreign service of the United States we do not recognize race, color, or creed--only merit.
Eleven years ago, I made my first appearance upon this campus, speaking to some disabled soldiers who were here being trained. It happened that that evening I talked about the need for leadership for peace. And so it seems to me, tonight, that American University and I at least agree on this: that the waging of peace demands the best we have, the best young men and women that we can find to put in this great effort which must go on around the world all the time.
And again, I think the support of the church means that we recognize that our policies and our effort must be based on the moral law. Just as our political organizations are really a political expression of a deeply-felt religious faith, so must success, I believe, in international relationships around the world represent truth, integrity and honesty. or they cannot long endure, even if there could be a temporary benefit of expediency.
So I come out this evening to congratulate American University on this great step, to congratulate all those people who have had anything to do with making possible the erection of the building and the establishment of this new school of training, and to express my good wishes to all students who will enter that school to go into the service of our country in the noblest work that our nation can possibly pursue, and that is the seeking of a peace based on justice and the right.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at the ground-breaking ceremony held in the Campus Quadrangle in connection with American University's forty-third commencement. After his remarks he was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Laws.