Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 28, 1955

Executive Order 10618—Amendment of Executive Order No. 10152, Prescribing Regulations Relating to the Right of Members of the Uniformed Services to Incentive Pay for the Performance of Hazardous Duty Required by Competent Orders
By virtue of the authority vested in me by sections 204 and 501 (d) of the Career Compensation Act of 1949 (63 Stat. 809, 826), as amended, and as President of the United States and Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, it is ordered that Executive Order No. 10152 of August 17, 1950, be, and it is hereby, amended as follows:
1. Subsection (b) of section 9 is amended to read:
"(b) The term 'duty involving the demolition of explosives' shall be construed to mean duty performed by members who, pursuant to competent orders and as a primary duty assignment (1) demolish by the use of explosives underwater objects, obstacles, or explosives, or recover and render harmless, by disarming or demolition, explosives which have failed to function as intended or which have become a potential hazard; (2) participate as students or instructors in instructional training, including that in the field or fleet, for the duties described in clause (1) hereof, provided that live explosives are used in such training; (3) participate in proficiency training, including that in the field or fleet, for the maintenance of skill in the duties described in clause (1) hereof, provided that live explosives are used in such training; or (4) experiment with or develop tools, equipment, or procedures for the demolition and rendering harmless of explosives, provided that live explosives are used."
2. The following new subsections are added to section 9 at the end thereof:
"(e) The term 'duty as low-pressure chamber inside observer' shall be construed to mean duty performed within low-pressure chambers at aviation physiological training facilities by members assigned to that duty as instructor-observers."
"(f) The term 'duty as human acceleration or deceleration experimental subject' shall be construed to mean duty performed by members exposed as human acceleration or deceleration experimental subjects utilizing experimental acceleration or deceleration devices."
"(g) The term 'duty involving the use of helium-oxygen for a breathing mixture in the execution of deep-sea diving' shall be construed to mean the performance of helium-oxygen diving duty aboard helium-oxygen equipped vessels by members assigned to that duty."
The amendment of subsection (b) of the said section 9 made by this order shall become effective on the first day of the month following the date of this order.
Subsections (e), (f), and (g) of the said section 9, as added by this order, shall be effective as of April 1, 1955.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
June 28, 1955.