Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 17, 1953

Letter to Chairmen of Senate Foreign Relations and House Foreign Affairs Committees Concerning the European Coal and Steel Community.
[Released June 17, 1953. Dated June 15, 1953]
My dear_____________:
While in Europe, I watched with keen interest the efforts to work out the first steps toward European federation. My experience there convinced me that the uniting of Europe is a necessity for the peace and prosperity of Europeans and of the world.
The recent visit to Washington by the members of the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community has given me the opportunity to review with them the work and plans of the Community. This Community seems to me to be the most hopeful and constructive development so far toward the economic and political integration of Europe. As such, this European initiative meets the often expressed hopes of the Congress of the United States.
M. Monnet, President of the High Authority, has described the general program of the Community for the development of its coal and steel resources which will require extensive investment for increasing production and improving productivity. The new Community does not wish to obtain grants for these purposes, but requires loan capital. The proceeds from the taxes now being levied and collected by the Community would appear to provide security for substantial borrowing.
In due time the Community will probably seek loans for these purposes from United States and European sources public and private. It appears to me that a portion of the financing of this development program by the United States Government or one of its agencies, out of moneys available for such purposes and under conditions insuring proper use and ultimate repayment, would foster European integration in a tangible and useful way.
Today the Common Assembly of the Community convenes to receive the first Annual Report from the High Authority regarding the activities of the Community. Your Committee might consider this an appropriate occasion to express its approval of the progress to date and its keen interest in the success of this and future steps toward European integration.
Sincerely yours,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This is the text of identical letters sent to the Honorable Alexander Wiley, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and to the Honorable Robert B. Chiperfield, Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Their replies, dated June 16, were released with the President's letter and are published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 28, p. 928).
On June 3 the White House announced that at the President's invitation, Jean Monnet, President of the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community, Franz Etzel, Vice President, and Dirk Spierenburg, one of its members, were making an official visit to the United States; and that on that date the President, Secretary of State Dulles, William Rand, Deputy Director for Mutual Security, and David K. E. Bruce, U.S. Representative to the European Coal and Steel Community, met with these members of the Community.