Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 15, 1960

Remarks to the Staff of the U.S. Embassy and the American Community in Manila.
Ladies and gentlemen:
In numerous places in the world I have been privileged to meet with the members of the United States diplomatic missions and the auxiliary forces and services that work with them. Always I try to point out that each of you is in fact an ambassador. You are representing America, and you are not doing it in the style that is described in very exaggerated fashion in "The Ugly American." You are trying to show those qualities of integrity and of friendliness and readiness to cooperate with others for good, that recognition that men and women are, after all, children of God, and we try to treat each other in that way.
Now when I come to this spot, here is a country with whom we have had a long association, and before it took its completely independent place in the family of nations we had toward it a position of tutor and helper, in order that it could fittingly take over the heavy responsibilities of sovereignty.
It seems to me, therefore, that in this particular Embassy, and in each particular individual that is connected with it, from the youngest child that can think to the oldest employee, that we have a very special effort to place America before the consciousness of not only every Filipino but every visitor to this city that does not know our country as we know it.
I believe, in doing so, you are not only discharging one of the gravest responsibilities that belongs to a public servant in the United States, but I believe it is an effort that if we want to pursue it with our hearts and our minds, it is one of the most joyous and one of the most satisfying efforts that can come to anyone--that can be performed by anyone. It is a great opportunity.
Now I served in this land something over 4 years myself, about a quarter century ago. It is an entirely different land from what I knew then. The progress in everything, as I see it in the people, in their education, in the buildings and the streets--industries--it is amazing. I see no limit to its future.
Therefore, we are not only fortunate to have this country as our great partner in the work that we do to pursue peace with justice and freedom, but we are very--indeed happy to have it. And I think and I am quite sure each of you feels this way.
I do not mean by any manner of means to be lecturing you or implying that you have not been doing exactly what I am now talking about. What I do mean is that this is an effort that concerns me so deeply that I have been traveling for many thousands of miles just for this one purpose, on the part of the individual who for the moment is the spokesman for the United States, to say these things over and over again. Because if there is one thing we want--I mean the United States wants--it is good, loyal friends, inspired by the same ideals of human dignity and decency that we ourselves cherish. So I envy you your assignment. I congratulate you for the way you have been doing it. And I just say: double it in spades. Thank you very much indeed. Goodbye.
Note: The President spoke at 4:45 p.m. at the American Embassy.