Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 15, 1955

Statement by the President on Proposed Agreements With Belgium, Canada, and the United Kingdom for Cooperation on the Civil Uses of Atomic Energy.
I AM HAPPY to accept the recommendation of the Atomic Energy Commission that approval be given the proposed bilateral agreements for cooperation concerning the civil uses of atomic energy signed today on behalf of the Government of this nation and the Governments of Belgium, Canada and the United Kingdom.
These proposed agreements are a logical extension of the previous active partnership between these nations and the United States for the development of atomic energy. The United Kingdom and Canada supplied knowledge and skill and manpower to play a full and fruitful part in the wartime joint effort which culminated in the first release of atomic energy. Belgium and Canada have provided uranium, the basic raw material for the wartime and the postwar atomic energy programs. All three have freely cooperated to further our common defense and security, strengthen the bulwarks of the free world, and help to open the way into the development of peaceful uses of the atom which holds forth so much promise and hope for betterment of human living and easing of international tensions.
Now, acting under the authorizations of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, we are privileged to enter into bilateral agreements which enlarge that promise and brighten that hope. The wisdom of the Congress in making this possible is exemplified by these proposed agreements. They lengthen the reach of cooperation among us looking toward the civil uses of atomic energy.
The pace of progress toward the goal of the atoms-for-peace program is accelerating. Important events are just ahead, such as the International Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy at Geneva in August.
Again on this occasion, as many times earlier, I pledge the unremitting cooperation of this nation to realize the benefits of atomic energy as a measure to promote lasting peace.
Note: At the time this statement was released the White House announced that the proposed agreements had been signed by representatives of the four governments at a White House ceremony that morning.
The text of the agreements and related papers are published in the Congressional Record (vol. 101, pp. 8661 ff., 8757 ff.).