Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 27, 1958

Joint Statement following Discussions With Prime Minister Daud of Afghanistan.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States and His Royal Highness Sardar Mohammed Daud, Prime Minister of Afghanistan, today concluded friendly and fruitful discussions on various matters of mutual interest. These discussions have been supplemented by talks between the Prime Minister and his advisers and the Secretary of State and other American officials.
The Prime Minister, who is visiting the United States upon the invitation of the President, has also been introduced to both Houses of the United States Congress and has met with the Justices of the United States Supreme Court. At the conclusion of his Washington stay, the Prime Minister will tomorrow begin a 12-day coast-to-coast tour of the United States during which he will meet with various civic, cultural and business leaders.
In their review of the world situation, as well as of developments in various areas of the globe, the President and Prime Minister were conscious of the universal desire of all peoples that war be eliminated and peace based on international justice .be established. They reaffirmed their determination to work for peace and security in the world. In behalf of their respective governments, they reasserted their firm attachment to the principles of the United Nations Charter and their determination to continue to cooperate in advancing the objectives of that vital instrument for peace.
Throughout the discussions between the Prime Minister and American representatives there was emphasis on the cordiality and genuine friendship which characterize Afghan-American relations. The President explained the principles and goals of the United States in the field of international affairs and the Prime Minister similarly described the attitude of the Government of Afghanistan in the field of international affairs including its traditional policy of neutrality and independence. It was agreed that both nations share beliefs in mutual respect for the sovereignty and independence of nations, in non-interference in the affairs of others, in social and economic progress for all peoples, and in the dignity of the human individual.
In this spirit, which underlay the examination of specific aspects of the relationship between the two countries, the Prime Minister was assured of the continuing readiness of the United States to be of assistance to Afghanistan in its high objective of developing the resources of the country for the welfare of the people. It was agreed that cooperation which already exists in the development of Afghan civil aviation, the Helmand Valley, surface transportation projects, and the Afghan educational system will be continued with a view toward making each of these projects as efficient and effective as circumstances permit.
As a symbol of the warm relations existing between the two countries and as an indication of a desire of the two nations to base their relations on mutual understanding, a cultural agreement between the Government of Afghanistan and the Government of the United States was signed on June 26.
In concluding their discussions, the President and the Prime Minister agreed that the exchanges of views between Afghan and United States representatives have been most useful. They expressed their desire to maintain and strengthen the cordial understanding between the two countries, which was so manifest during the Prime Minister's visit.

SARDAR MOHAMMED DAUD
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The text of the United States Afghan Cultural Agreement is published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 39, P. 128).