Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 16, 1959

Remarks at the Opening of the National 4-H Club Center.
Miss Hollmer, Mr. Secretary, Distinguished Guests and Friends:
It is truly a great privilege for me to come here for these few moments to be with the 4-H'ers and the people who have brought about the development of this Center.
I am here just because I like the 4-H'ers. I have liked them ever since I first met them. I have met them in every kind of hamlet, city, place, and under every possible condition, and never yet found one who seemed to demonstrate any trait or characteristic that I found unpleasant. I like them.
One reason I like them is because they are young. They are America. They are America of tomorrow and next year and the decades to come. And since every true American is dedicated to America's future as well as to the solution of any of its current problems, we must look toward these young people and say here is a representation or the focus of our dedication.
Next, I like 4-H'ers because they are dedicated to excellence. They want to do things better. They do so many things. One I am interested in is that they always bring up. fatter steers and nicer looking ones.
The next thing I like about them is their example to other young people. They are doing useful things. They are leaders. They lead us to greater dedication to our country, a greater expression of the love for our country that we all feel. They are, by their work, indeed making this country a better one.
There are dozens of other reasons why I like these people. In the rural areas they are agents for bringing to everybody everywhere some new knowledge, new information, and certainly new inspiration. They do the same in the cities.
As long as we have young people of these characteristics, devoted with their hearts and their heads and their hands and their health to doing these things, America cannot be anything but successful.
And so, as I have the honor of cutting the ribbon which is the symbol of the dedication of this building, I pledge to all of 4-H my continued support, admiration, respect--and I say again, affection.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President's opening words referred to Anita Hollmer, New York delegate to the National 4-H Conference then meeting in Washington, and Ezra Taft Benson, Secretary of Agriculture.