Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 20, 1960

Remarks Upon Arrival at the Honolulu International Airport.
Governor Quinn, Admiral Felt, and all members of the armed services here in Hawaii, and my fiends:
It is a signal privilege that is mine to land here on this beautiful island for the first time since it has been a State.
As your Governor has said, this is something that had been on my heart for a long time, and more particularly since 1942. To my theater was sent the first Japanese-American unit, the 100th Battalion, which covered itself with glory in a number of hard fought fields. Then came the 442d, and apparently the desire to enlist was so great that it was an over-strength regiment. Every man seemed to be anxious to prove not only his loyalty to his adopted country, to America, but his readiness to die for the principles that that country stands for.
To both those units and particularly to every man here who was ever a part of those two units, I send my warmest and affectionate greetings, and render them the salute due to brave men.
Hawaii, I think, should long have been a State for another reason. Here we have a true example of men living together in human dignity, men of every race and creed that can possibly exist on this earth. And they have lived so together to their mutual benefit, mutual profit, and their mutual satisfaction--and possibly even deeper than that, to their mutual self-respect.

I cannot tell you what good I believe can me out of the effort or the

activities that will go on here in Hawaii, where it will act as really the meeting place between the Western and Eastern Hemispheres in the Pacific.
I understand the East-West Center is really getting off the ground and going. I can't imagine anything better than for us to use this place, and by this I mean Hawaiians using this opportunity in this area to bring about a better feeling between the peoples bordering the Pacific all the way around, so that among us we may live in greater strength, in greater cooperation, and in mutual harmony.
So it is truly an eventful day for me. I thank the members of the Honor Guard for coming out, and each citizen for doing me the courtesy to come out here today in order that I might greet them.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 12:15 p.m. In his opening words he referred to Governor William F. Quinn of Hawaii and Adm. Harry Donald felt, Commander in Chief, Pacific fleet.