Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 05, 1954

Memorandum on the Community Chest Campaign in the National Capital Area.
[Released June 5, 1954- Dated June 3, 1954]
To the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
This fail will mark the twenty-seventh successive campaign for the Red Feather agencies of the Community Chests in the National Capital Area. To act as Chairman of the Government Unit in this important appeal, I have been happy to approve the appointment of the Honorable Edmund F. Mansure, Administrator of the General Services Administration.
I ask that you give to Mr. Mansure your fullest measure of support and assistance. I am sure that all persons in authority in the Federal and District Government will be personally interested and will extend their complete cooperation to this important charitable appeal. Such cooperation should logically include the assumption of equitable unit goals, the effective solicitation of all employees, and the setting up of an adequate collection method for the convenience of those who wish to make contributions on an installment basis.
The Community Chest Federation responsible for this annual appeal unites 6 Community Chests and more than 100 Red Feather services in one federated campaign to provide local health, welfare and recreational programs which are so vital if we are to keep our communities healthy and strong.
In the interest of eliminating an additional campaign, the appeal will again include the United Defense Fund which is responsible for the programs of the USO, USO Camp Shows, and United Community Defense Services. These programs continue to be essential to the morale and happiness of our men and women of the Armed Forces both at home and overseas.
It is my hope that all officials and employees will be given the opportunity to contribute and that each will want to do so generously. Each individual's giving should reflect a fair share towards the support of these worthwhile services in effective operation throughout the full year ahead.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER