Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 24, 1957

Joint Statement With Prime Minister Macmillan Following the Bermuda Conference.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, assisted by the United States Secretary of State and the British Foreign Secretary and other advisers, have exchanged views during the past three days on many subjects of mutual concern. They have conducted their discussions with the freedom and frankness permitted to old friends. In a world of growing interdependence they recognize their responsibility to seek to coordinate their foreign policies in the interests of peace with justice.
Among the subjects discussed in detail were common problems concerning the Middle East, Far East, NATO, European Cooperation, the reunification of Germany, and Defense.
The President and the Prime Minister are well satisfied with the results of this Conference, at which a number of decisions have been taken. They intend to continue the exchange of views so well begun.
The agreements and conclusions reached on the main subjects discussed at the Conference are annexed.
ANNEX I
1. Recognition of the value of collective security pacts within the framework of the United Nations, and the special importance of NATO for both countries as the cornerstone of their policy in the West.
2. Reaffirmation of common interest in the development of European unity within the Atlantic Community.
3. Agreement on the importance of closer association of the United Kingdom with Europe.
4. Agreement on the benefits likely to accrue for European and world trade from the plans for the common market and the Free Trade Area, provided they do not lead to a high tariff bloc; and on the desirability that all countries should pursue liberal trade policies.
5. Willingness of the United States under authority of the recent Middle East joint resolution, to participate actively in the work of the Military Committee of the Baghdad Pact.
6. Reaffirmation of intention to support the right of the German people to early reunification in peace and freedom.
7. Sympathy for the people of Hungary; condemnation of repressive Soviet policies towards the peoples of Eastern Europe, and of Soviet defiance of relevant United Nations resolutions.
8. Agreement on the need for the speedy implementation of recent resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly dealing with the Gaza Strip and the Gulf of Aqaba.
9. Agreement on the importance of compliance both in letter and in spirit with the Security Council Resolution of October 13 concerning the Suez Canal, and on support for the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about a settlement in accordance with its provisions.
10. Joint declaration on policy regarding nuclear tests (See Annex II).
11. Agreement in principle that, in the interest of mutual defense and mutual economy, certain guided missiles will be made available by the United States for use by British forces.
ANNEX II
1. For a long time our two Governments have been attempting to negotiate with the Soviet Union under the auspices of the United Nations Disarmament Commission an effective agreement for comprehensive disarmament. We are continuing to seek such an agreement in the current disarmament discussions in London. In the absence of such an agreement the security of the free world must continue to depend to a marked degree upon the nuclear deterrent. To maintain this effectively, continued nuclear testing is required, certainly for the present.
2. We recognize, however, that there is sincere concern that continued. nuclear testing may increase world radiation to levels which might be harmful. Studies by independent scientific organizations confirm our belief that this will not happen so long as testing is continued with due restraint. Moreover, the testing program has demonstrated the feasibility of greatly reducing worldwide fallout from large nuclear explosions.
3. Over the past months our Governments have considered various proposed methods of limiting tests. We have now concluded together that in the absence of more general nuclear control agreements of the kind which we have been and are seeking, a test limitation agreement could not today be effectively enforced for technical reasons; nor could breaches of it be surely detected. We believe nevertheless that even before a general agreement is reached self-imposed restraint can and should be exercised by nations which conduct tests.
4. Therefore, on behalf of our two Governments, we declare our intention to continue to conduct nuclear tests only in such manner as will keep world radiation from rising to more than a small fraction of the levels that might be hazardous. We look to the Soviet Union to exercise a similar restraint.
5. We shall continue our general practice of publicly announcing our test series well in advance of their occurrence with information as to their location and general timing. We would be willing to register with the United Nations advance notice of our intention to conduct future nuclear tests and to permit limited international observation of such tests if the Soviet Union would do the same.