Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 15, 1960

Proclamation 3337—Eighteenth Decennial Census

Whereas, pursuant to section 2 of Article I of the Constitution of the United States and chapter 5 of title 13 of the United States Code, the Eighteenth Decennial Census of the United States will be taken beginning April 1, 1960; and
Whereasthis Census, which will mark the one hundred and seventieth anniversary of the first United States Census, is required by the Constitution to determine the apportionment among the several States of members of the House of Representatives; and
Whereasduring the ten years since the Seventeenth Decennial Census was taken great changes have occurred in the growth, location, and characteristics of our people and in their housing and activities, and these changes have made it more essential than ever before that we have a current inventory of the Nation's people, homes, and other resources to guide us in the future:
Now, Therefore, I, Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, do hereby declare and make known that under the law it is the duty of every person over eighteen years of age to answer all questions in the census schedules applying to him and the family to which he belongs, and to the home occupied by him or his family, and that any person refusing to do so is subject to penalty as provided by law.
The sole purpose of the Census is to secure general statistical information regarding the population, its characteristics, and its homes. Replies are required from individuals only to enable the compilation of such general statistics. No person can be harmed in any way by furnishing the information required. Individual information collected in the taking of the Eighteenth Decennial Census will not be used for purposes of taxation, investigation, or regulation, or in connection with military or jury service, the enforcement of school attendance, the regulation of immigration, or the enforcement of any national, state, or local law, or ordinance. There need be no fear that disclosure will be made regarding any individual person or his affairs. For the due protection of the rights and interests of the persons furnishing information, every employee of the Census Bureau is prohibited, under heavy penalty, from disclosing any information which may come to his knowledge by reason of his employment.
Life and liberty in a free country entail a variety of cooperative actions for the common good. The prompt, complete, and accurate answering of all official inquiries made by Census officials should be regarded as one of the requirements of good citizenship.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this fifteenth day of March in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-fourth.


DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
By the President:

CHRISTIAN A. HERTER,

Secretary of State