Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 01, 1960

Joint Statement Following Discussions With President Alessandri of Chile.
THE PRESIDENTS of the United States of America and of Chile, Messrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower and Jorge Alessandri, on the occasion of the visit to Santiago of President Eisenhower, from February 29 to March 2, 1960, exchanged views on various matters of common interest:
The Presidents discussed the collaboration of Chile and the United States of America in international organizations with a view to the realization of the common principles which guide the foreign policies of both countries.
In particular they exchanged ideas regarding the principal affairs of the world situation and, moreover, concerning measures which would make possible the strengthening of the inter-American system in accordance with the Declaration of Santiago, which was unanimously approved at the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs, held in August, 1959.
They reaffirmed the urgency of seeking solutions for the problems of economic development and of improving living standards in America. They likewise reiterated that the inter-American system should be based on respect for human rights, the effective exercise of democracy, and non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States.
Economic matters of common interest, particularly those of hemispheric scope comprehended in Operation Pan America, were also discussed. Similarly, special attention was given to the armaments problem in the continent and to Chile's initiative in proposing that the nations of the Americas give their urgent consideration to this matter, with the objective of reaching an appropriate equilibrium within a general policy of limitation on arms purchases.
The financing of economic development, both public and private, was also discussed, as was the formation of various regional trade zones, both in Europe and the Americas, and their possible effects on the economies of this hemisphere.
Finally, programs of cultural collaboration were reviewed, with emphasis on the importance of disseminating scientific and technical knowledge.
Note: This statement was released at Santiago, Chile.
The Declaration of Santiago is published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 41, p. 342).