Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 28, 1958

Proclamation 3229—Determining Alpha and Beta 3-Ethyl-1-Methyl-4-Phenyl-4-Propionoxy-Piperdine to be Opiates

Whereassection 4731 (g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 provides in part as follows:
OPIATE. The word "opiate", as used in this part shall mean any drug (as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; 52 Stat. 1041, section 201 (g); 21 II. S. C. 321) found by the Secretary or his delegate, after due notice and opportunity for public hearing, to have an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine or cocaine, and proclaimed by the President to have been so found by the Secretary or his delegate. * * *;
Whereasthe Secretary of the Treasury, after due notice and opportunity for public hearing, has found that each of the following-named drugs has an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine, and that in the public interest this finding should be effective immediately:
α-3-Ethyl-l-methyl-4-phenyl-4-pro-pionoxypiperidine
β-3-Ethyl-l-methyl-4-phenyl-4-pro-pionoxypiperidine;
ANDWhereasa previous finding with respect to the beta isomeric form of the drug, described in Proclamation No. 2851 of August 26, 1949, and discovered to have been prematurely made, has been withdrawn by the Secretary of the Treasury as of August 26, 1949, and replaced by the above-described finding:
Now, Therefore, I, Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, do hereby proclaim that the Secretary of the Treasury has found that each of the following-named drugs has an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine, and that in the public interest this finding should be effective immediately:
α-3-Ethyl-l-methyl-4-phenyl-4-pro-pionoxypiperidine
β-3 Ethyl-1-methyl-4-phenyl-4-pro-pionoxypiperidine
And I do further proclaim that a previous finding with respect to the beta isomeric form of the drug, described in Proclamation No. 2851 of August 26, 1949, and discovered to have been prematurely made, has been withdrawn by the Secretary of the Treasury as of August 26, 1949, and replaced by the finding herein proclaimed; and the said Proclamation No. 2851 is modified accordingly.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this 28th day of March in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-second.


DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
By the President:

JOHN FOSTER DULLES,

Secretary of State