Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 12, 1959

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 1 of 1959.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1959, prepared in accordance with the Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended, and providing for transfer of certain functions from the Secretary of the Interior to the Secretary of Agriculture.
Both the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior now have responsibilities with respect to certain land or timber exchanges and land sales involving Federal lands. Also, the Department of the Interior is responsible for the use and disposal of mineral materials from acquired lands which are under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture. By placing certain functions pertinent to these matters in the Department which administers the lands, Reorganization Plan No. I of 1959 will bring about simplification of the work of the two Departments relating to such matters, more expeditious and economical performance of such work, and clarification of responsibilities concerning the work.
The exchange act of March 20, 1922 (42 Stat. 465), as amended, authorizes the exchange of national-forest land or timber for other lands within the boundaries of the national forests. The national forests are administered by the Department of Agriculture. Under this law and the seven other land exchange statutes cited, the Secretary of the Interior must make determinations as to whether a transaction is in the public interest, must review and accept titles, and adjudicate appeals. With exceptions indicated in the transmitted reorganization plan, including exceptions with respect to the issuance of patents to lands, the plan provides for the transfer of the functions of the Secretary of the Interior under these exchange statutes to the Secretary of Agriculture, who administers the national forests. The Secretary of the Interior also has the responsibility under the act of April 28, 1930 (46 Stat. 257) to reconvey lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture not accepted in exchange transactions. These functions either are duplications of those performed by the Department of Agriculture or can be more easily performed by that Department as it administers the lands involved and has detailed information and records.
The Tongass Timber Act of August 8, 1947 (61 Stat. 920) authorizes the sale of tracts of national-forest land found reasonably necessary for the processing of timber from the Tongass National Forest. Under the act, the Secretary of the Interior must appraise and sell such lands, with concurrence of the Secretary of Agriculture. The Department of Agriculture administers the land involved, has personnel on the ground, and can perform this function most expeditiously and economically.
Section 10 of the Weeks law of March 1, 1911 (36 Stat. 962) authorizes sale of small tracts of acquired national-forest land found chiefly valuable for agriculture. Under the act the Secretary of the Interior must join in the promulgation of joint regulations. Such lands are administered by the Department of Agriculture and sale of them is not related to programs of the Department of the Interior. This function can be most easily and .economically performed by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Under the act of July 31, 1947 (61 Stat. 681), as amended, the Secretary of Agriculture can dispose of common varieties of sand, gravel, stone, pumice and other materials from lands reserved from the public domain which are under his jurisdiction. With respect to these materials in acquired lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture such disposal must be by the Secretary of the Interior. The reorganization plan will place in the Secretary of Agriculture the same authority in regard to such materials in acquired lands under his jurisdiction as he now exercises for other lands. Such activity most efficiently and economically can be performed by the Secretary of Agriculture in conjunction with other management activities on lands he administers.
By providing sound organizational arrangements, the taking effect of the reorganizations included in the accompanying reorganization plan will make possible more economical and expeditious administration of the affected functions. It is, however, impracticable to itemize at this time the reductions of expenditures which it is probable will be brought about by such taking effect.
After investigation, I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in the reorganization plan transmitted herewith is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 2 (a) of the Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended.
I recommend that the Congress allow the reorganization plan to become effective.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Reorganization Plan 1 of 1959 is published in House Document 140 (86th Cong., 1st sess.).