Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 07, 1958

Letter Accepting Resignation of Marion B. Folsom as Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare.
Dear Marion:
The devoted leadership that you have given as Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare makes most difficult this letter of acceptance of your resignation.
During the past three years your close attention to the needs that pertain so directly to the well-being of American citizens has given continuing reassurance that federal responsibilities in these areas of vital importance to the future of our Nation would have the thorough consideration they merit. I know that your contribution to the strengthening of our Social Security system, to the greater effectiveness of our public health activities, and to the better meeting of the educational requirements of our age command wide respect. I warmly share that respect for your achievements, and note particularly the importance of your continuing efforts in behalf of legislation to help State and local school systems, and our colleges and universities, meet needs in education, and thereby enhance our national security and progress.
I join with you in gratification that Arthur Flemming can succeed you, and carry forward without interruption the vital work in which you have been engaged.
In accepting your resignation as you requested, I emphasize my gratitude for the wisdom and experience that you have brought to the deliberations of this Administration, first as Under Secretary of the Treasury, then in the even more demanding post of Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. I am thankful, too, for the willing assistance you have provided in taking part in many Cabinet and interdepartmental activities directly and indirectly related to your specific responsibilities.
There will be many occasions, I am sure, when we will have need to consult with you in the months ahead, and I am indeed grateful that you will be available for such continued assistance.
With warm regard and best wishes for your future health and happiness,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Mr. Folsom served as Under Secretary of the Treasury from January 28, 1953, to July 31, 1955, and as Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare after August 1, 1955. His letter was released with the President's reply.