Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 31, 1960

Remarks of Welcome to the Delegates of SEATO at a Luncheon Given in Their Honor at the White House
Excellencies and distinguished guests:
It is a deep personal honor to welcome as our honored guests today the Council members, their senior civil and military advisers, the secretary-general and the Chief of the Military Planning Office of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.
I have long held an unwavering conviction that our collective security arrangements are indispensable safeguards of freedom with justice in today's world. In an address called "The Chance for Peace" which I made soon after taking office in 1953 I advocated. "united action" for Southeast Asia. This policy was realized in September 1954 when our eight countries concluded a solemn commitment at Manila. It was an extraordinary event when countries with such diversity and geographical separation united to preserve freedom and security and to promote the economic well-being and development of the peoples of the Treaty Area. I am particularly pleased that we have with us today two of those who were present on that historic occasion: Secretary-General Sarasin, who was then a member of the Thai delegation, and Senator Mansfield, a member of the American delegation.
We can take much satisfaction in the fact that our first objective of preventing further Communist domination through aggression or subversion in the Treaty Area has been realized. However, we cannot afford to relax our vigilance or slacken our cooperative efforts to further the high principles of the Pacific Charter.
No defensive alliance of which we are a member faces a greater challenge or protects a more vital segment of the free world than SEATO. Together we can continue to measure up to the task and, in the process, deepen our mutual understanding through intimate consultations such as those you are initiating today. Under these circumstances the responsibilities which devolve upon you who are directly charged with promoting SEATO's high objectives are indeed great.
Note: In the opening paragraph the President referred to His Excellency Pore Sarasin of Thailand, Secretary-General of SEATO, and Brigadier L. W. Thornton, C.B.E., of New Zealand, Chief of the Military Planning Office of SEATO. Later in his remarks he referred also to Mike Mansfield, U.S. Senator from Montana.