Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 02, 1955

Citation and Remarks at Presentation to Field Marshal Pibulsonggram of Thailand of the Legion of Merit, Degree of Chief Commander.
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD OF

THE LEGION OF MERIT

(DEGREE OF CHIEF COMMANDER)

TO

FIELD MARSHAL P. PIBULSONGGRAM

ROYAL THAI ARMY
For exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services to the United Nations and to the cause of freedom as Prime Minister and Minister of Defense, Kingdom of Thailand. Following the outbreak of hostilities in Korea on 26 June 1950, military forces from the Kingdom of Thailand were among the first to respond to the call of the United Nations to meet the challenge of enemy aggressor forces with armed resistance. With the approval of his Council of Ministers, Field Marshal Pibulsonggram directed the organization, training and equipping of a regimental combat team in Thailand, establishing a forward headquarters in Korea. Immediately upon their attainment of operational readiness he placed an infantry battalion, two frigates, an air force transportation detachment, and a Red Cross medical unit at the disposal of the Commander in Chief, United Nations Command, to support active military operations. Throughout the uncertain months which followed, he worked untiringly to further the spirit of cooperation within the United Nations' first great international fighting force. A resourceful and inspiring leader, he was instrumental in expanding the activities of the Joint United States Military Advisory Group to Thailand to include continuing training programs, thereby insuring the maximum mobility and combat effectiveness of the Royal Thai Armed Forces. By his outstanding professional skill, sound judgment and keen foresight, Field Marshal Pibulsonggram contributed significantly to the missions and objectives of the United Nations Command, reflecting the highest credit upon himself and the Royal Thai Armed Forces.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
[Remarks of the President]
Your Excellency, it is a great privilege for me to present to you the highest award that this Government can give to anyone not a citizen of this country.
It is a special privilege, because in this way we can take note, we hope, of the cooperation of one who has done so much to stand by our side as all of us attempt to defend human freedom, dignity, and liberty in the world.

My earnest compliments to you, sir.
Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden. Field Marshal Pibulsonggram's response follows:
I am very grateful to you, sir, that when I arrived in your great country, everywhere I received a very cordial welcome--a treasured welcome. And this morning I had the occasion to have an audience with you, Mr. President, and now I receive this decoration from Your Excellency. I feel very honored. I try as forcibly as I can to lead my country to secure peace in the world. They will be always at your side in any way--to create the peace of the world.