Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 22, 1957

Statement by the President on the Employment of the Physically Handicapped.
[ Recorded on film and tape ]
My Fellow Americans:
I appreciate this opportunity to talk to you about a human problem of importance to all of us. This is the full employment of our handicapped workers; providing jobs for men and women handicapped by physical injuries caused by battle or accident or affliction.
To begin, there is one basic thing to remember about hiring workers who are physically handicapped. It is good business to hire them--good for the Nation and good for the person. It makes an earner out of an American who would otherwise be relatively helpless. I would like to congratulate the citizens who understand this and are helping to promote the widespread use of our handicapped workers.
Since the last war, our Nation has made some splendid progress in employing the handicapped. Public employment offices have found almost three million jobs for them since 1945. Many more have found jobs on their own. This is dear proof that America has learned by experience that handicapped workers can be among our most productive and our most dependable employees.
In finding good men to fill hard jobs, we know it is a person's ability, and not his disability, that counts. I remember once, during the war, asking for a particular man for a certain assignment. He was just the man I needed but the doctors would not recommend him because they said he had great difficulty in walking. That made no difference to me. I needed the man's head and heart and if he could not walk to work, I knew he would find some way to get there. And he did. He came, and took the job and filled it with distinction.
Each of you has had a similar experience. Each of you has probably seen how courage and training have successfully overcome the handicaps of physical injury. Now, we must tell others about the value of employing the physically handicapped because two million Americans with physical disability are still waiting to be used. Two million Americans could enter the labor force today if they were properly prepared and equipped to do so. Congress has recognized this opportunity and has provided funds for stepping up the rehabilitation program. I hope all States will soon take advantage of the increased Federal funds which are available.
It is part of the American tradition to help others to help themselves. We also believe in the God-given dignity of each individual. This dignity is our birthright and it finds its mature meaning in useful employment.
I urge all employers, therefore, to use the handicapped wherever possible. I urge all .workers to accept their handicapped fellow-Americans as their co-workers. In these demanding times, the labor force of our Nation is our most precious asset. Working shoulder-to-shoulder, the handicapped can add spirit and power to America as we seek to promote the strength of the whole free world.
Note: This statement was recorded for use in connection with the observance of the tenth year of operations of the President's Committee on the Employment of the Physically Handicapped.