Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 26, 1957

Statement by the President in Response to the Report of the Inter-American Committee of Presidential Representatives.
I HAVE READ with great interest the twenty-seven recommendations contained in the Report of the Inter-American Committee of Presidential Representatives and have discussed them personally with my brother, Dr. Milton Eisenhower, who served as Chairman of that Committee.
I wish to express my gratitude to the Representatives of each Chief of State who served on the Committee. I believe that they have made excellent progress towards the goal which was originally set for the Committee--making the Organization of American States a more effective instrument in those fields of cooperative effort affecting the welfare of the individual. I hope that many of the recommendations will be put into effect as promptly as possible.
These recommendations cover a wide field of endeavor, including economic, social and technical matters.
I am particularly impressed by the program for eradicating malaria from the Western Hemisphere within five years and by the proposal to establish an Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission to further the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
The considerable expansion planned for the activities of the Inter-American Institute of Agricultural Sciences should prove of great long-range benefit to the peoples of America. The great increase in the number of scholarships for the youth of our various countries should result in wider educational opportunities and in improved international understanding.
A number of the recommendations call for specific action by the Organization of American States. I have given instructions to the appropriate officials of the Administration to see that the proper steps are taken, through United States Representatives in the Organization of American States, to support these recommendations.
Note: The Inter-American Committee of Presidential Representatives was appointed as a result of a proposal made by the President in July 1956 at the Panama meeting of the Presidents of the American Republics.
The report referred to in the first paragraph was submitted on May 8, 1957, to the Chiefs of State of the American Republics. Before the Committee was dissolved, the Representatives agreed that the complete text of their report would not be released until May 25, 1957, in order to provide each Chief of State an opportunity to receive and study it, and to issue it with such comments as he might care to make.
The report was prepared in mimeographed form only and was made available by the Pan American Union.