Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 21, 1956

Letter to Percival F. Brundage, Director, Bureau of the Budget, on the Hoover Commission Recommendation on Government Reporting Requirements.
[Released May 21, 1956. Dated May 11, 1956]
Dear Mr. Brundage:
The recent report of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government entitled Paperwork Management, Part II, the Nation's Paperwork [or the Government directs attention to the problem of Government requirements which impose unnecessary paperwork on the public. The report recommends:
"That the President direct the Bureau of the Budget, together with its Advisory Council on Federal Reports and in cooperation with the General Services Administration, to give increased emphasis in their reports program to the need to protect the public from unnecessary reporting burdens by continuing the method of cooperation between industry and Government pursued by our task force as outlined above."
I endorse the Commission's recommendation that increased emphasis be placed on actions to reduce unnecessary reporting burdens on industry and the public. In recognition of the responsibilities for the improvement of government statistical activities and for the promotion of economy and efficiency in executive branch operations already assigned to the Bureau of the Budget, I believe the Bureau is the logical agency to assume leadership in such activities. A significant portion of the paperwork required of the public is associated with government forms and related reporting requirements which require your approval under the Federal Reports Act, and I am gratified at the substantial progress already made in this program by the Bureau and its Advisory Council on Federal Reports.
I wish you to give increased emphasis in this program to the elimination of reporting requirements which impose unnecessary paperwork on the public. With respect to matters not subject to review under the Federal Reports Act, I want you to proceed with the development, in cooperation with the affected executive agencies, of plans for eliminating unnecessary public reporting requirements and for simplifying related procedures and systems in such agencies.
In carrying out this program I assume that you will make maximum use of the advisory services of the Advisory Council on Federal Reports and its various specialized committees. You will also wish to consult freely with the affected Federal agencies and when appropriate with the General Services Administration. You are authorized and directed to issue such circulars or other instructions as you may find useful in carrying out this assignment.
I should like to receive from you by September 30, 1956, a report of your progress together with any recommendations you may have as to further steps required for the effective control of the paperwork burden on the public.
Increased efforts to reduce the reporting burden on the public, together with actions being taken by the General Services Administration and other executive agencies aimed at solution of paperwork problems within the Government, will go far toward attaining the desirable objectives of the Hoover Commission's recommendations for improvement of paperwork management. They form a logical and valuable part of the broader responsibility and program of the Bureau of the Budget to bring about better internal business management throughout the Executive Branch.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The report of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch, entitled "Paperwork Management, Part II," is dated June 1955 (Government Printing Office, 1955). In response to the President's request, a multilithed staff report entitled "Reduction of Paperwork Burden," dated September 28, 1956, was prepared by the Office of Statistical Standards, Bureau of the Budget.