Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 03, 1955

Statement by the President on Approving a Proposed Agreement With Turkey for Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
ON THE recommendation of the Atomic Energy Commission I am glad to approve this proposed agreement between the Republic of Turkey and the United States for cooperation in the unclassified scientific study of atomic energy and development of its peaceful uses.
This historic occasion signalizes the completion of negotiations for the first agreement for cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy under the new Atomic Energy Act. It is another example of the vision of the Congress in enacting this law to meet the needs for peaceful atomic development at home and abroad. This occasion also marks another among the many instances of friendly exchange and mutual cooperation between our two nations.
Over a year ago, President Bayar of Turkey when visiting the United States made specific reference to the atoms-for-peace program and stated that "we who are dedicated to the security of the free world have no choice but to give this plan our total endorsement". The initialing of this proposed agreement marks the first major step in a new field of United States-Turkish cooperation which gives promise of wide benefits to mankind.
It augments the many evidences of mutual trust and teamwork in scientific and technical development such as the educational and other training programs we have carried on with Turkey for several years.
The proposed agreement will promptly be sent to the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of the Congress as required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
Note: A White House release of the same day stated that the President gave his formal approval to the proposed agreement in a letter to Dr. Willard F. Libby, Acting Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, signed at the conclusion of ceremonies at which the agreement was initialed and notes were exchanged.
The release further stated that under the proposed agreement the AEC would lease to Turkey up to 6 kilograms of uranium 235. It added that this fissionable material would be drawn from the 100 kilograms of U-235 approved by the President for use in construction of small scale research reactors and for other research purposes in foreign countries as a part of the United States atoms-for-peace program.
The text of the agreement and of the President's letter to Dr. Libby are published in Senate Report 572 (84th Cong., 1st sess.).