Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 26, 1959

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Proposed Agreements With Germany, the Netherlands, and Turkey for Cooperation on Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defense.
To the Congress of the United States:
In December 1957 the Heads of Government of the nations members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization reached agreement in principle on the desirability of achieving the most effective pattern of NATO military defensive strength, taking into account the most recent developments in weapons and techniques. In enunciating this agreement in principle the Heads of Government made it clear that this decision was the result of the fact that the Soviet leaders, while preventing a general disarmament agreement, had left no doubt that the most modern and destructive weapons of all kinds were being introduced into the Soviet armed forces. The introduction of modern weapons into NATO forces should be no cause for concern on the part of other countries, since NATO is purely a defensive alliance.
It is our conviction and the conviction of our NATO allies that the introduction into NATO defenses of the most modern weapons available is essential in maintaining the strength necessary to the Alliance. Any alliance depends in the last analysis upon the sense of shared mutual interests among its members, and by sharing with our Allies certain training information we are demonstrating concretely our sense of partnership in NATO's defensive planning. Failure on our part to contribute to the improvement of the state of operational readiness of the forces of other members of NATO will only encourage the Soviet Union to believe that it can eventually succeed in its goal of destroying NATO's effectiveness.
To facilitate the necessary cooperation on our part legislation amending the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 was enacted during the last session of the Congress. Pursuant to that legislation agreements for cooperation have recently been concluded with three of our NATO partners; all of these agreements are designed to implement in important respects the agreed NATO program. These agreements will enable the United States to cooperate effectively in mutual defense planning with these nations and in the training of their respective NATO forces in order that, if an attack on NATO should occur, under the direction of the Supreme Allied Commander for Europe these forces could effectively use nuclear weapons in their defense.
These agreements represent only a portion of the work necessary for complete implementation of the decision taken by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in December 1957. I anticipate the conclusion of similar agreements for cooperation with certain other NATO nations as the Alliance's defensive planning continues.
Pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, I am submitting to each House of the Congress an authoritative copy of three agreements, one with the Federal Republic of Germany, one with the Kingdom of the Netherlands and one with the Government of Turkey. I am also transmitting a copy of the Secretary of State's letter accompanying authoritative copies of the signed agreements, a copy of three joint letters from the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission recommending my approval of these documents and copies of my memoranda in reply thereto setting forth my approval.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The text of the agreements and related documents is published in the Congressional Record of June 9 (vol. 105, p. 9241).
Similar messages to the Congress concerning agreements with other countries were made public by the White House. Together with the text of the agreements and related documents they are published in the Congressional Record as follows: France and the United Kingdom (May 26, vol. 105, pp. 8159, 8161, respectively), Canada (June 9, vol. 105, p. 9238), and Greece (June 17, vol. 105, p. 10028). The agreement with the United Kingdom is an amendment to the agreement of July 3, 1958 (Senate Report 2041, 85th Cong., 2d sess.).