Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 27, 1957

Exchange of Messages Between the President and the President of Viet-Nam.
[Released May 27, 1957. Dated May 23, 1957]
His Excellency

Ngo Dinh Diem

President of the Republic of Viet-Nam
I was deeply touched by your message. Your most welcome visit to the United States has served to strengthen even further the friendship between our two countries and to permit the people of this country to demonstrate their high esteem for you and the people of Viet-Nam. It has been a very great pleasure for me to have met you personally and to have had a frank exchange of views on matters of mutual interest to our countries. The progress of the Republic of Viet-Nam, under your leadership, in promoting peace, stability and the general welfare of the Vietnamese people augurs well for the future of your country.
My warmest wishes go with you on your return to Viet-Nam.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: President Diem's message, dated May 21, 1957, follows:
Upon leaving the United States of America, I want to thank you and the American people for your warm hospitality and kindness during my visit. I am most gratified to find such response to the efforts made by the Vietnamese people and myself to achieve and to keep our freedom. My visit has also convinced me that the American people are as rich in moral strength and spiritual values as in material resources. Everywhere I have seen prodigious achievements, enormous prosperity and almost incredibly high living standards due to free competition, firm initiative and organization, painstaking efforts, solidarity and social justice. These are qualities of every great nation and give me still more confidence in true Democracy and in the future of our threatened free world.
This confidence has also been strengthened by my meeting you and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles: it is certainly fortunate for our two countries that the foreign policy of the United States is being directed by men of such generosity farsightedness and integrity.
God bless you and the American people.
NGO DINH DIEM