Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 04, 1953

Executive Order 10500—Designation of the Power Authority of the State of New York and Establishment of the United States Section of the St. Lawrence River Joint Board of Engineers
WHEREAS pursuant to the provisions of the Boundary Waters Treaty of January 11, 1909 (36 Stat. 2448), the Government of the United States of America and the Government of Canada on June 30, 1952, filed concurrent and complementary applications with the International Joint Commission for an Order of Approval of the construction, jointly by entities to be designated by the respective Governments, of certain works for the development of power in the International Rapids Section of the St. Lawrence River and of the maintenance and operation of such works; and
WHEREAS the Commission on October 29, 1952, issued an Order of Approval for the construction, maintenance, and operation of such works jointly by The Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario and by an entity to be designated by the Government of the United States, subject to the terms and conditions contained in that Order of Approval; and
WHEREAS condition (g) of the Order of Approval reads in part as follows:
"In accordance with the Applications, the establishment by the Governments of Canada and of the United States of a Joint Board of Engineers to be known as the St. Lawrence River Joint Board of Engineers (hereinafter referred to as the 'Joint Board of Engineers') consisting of an equal number of representatives of Canada and the United States to be designated by the respective Governments, is approved. The duties of the Joint Board of Engineers shall be to review and coordinate, and, if both Governments so authorize, approve the plans and specifications of the works and the programs of construction thereof submitted for the approval of the respective Governments as specified above, and to assure the construction of the works in accordance therewith as approved. *****
and
WHEREAS the Federal Power Commission on July 15, 1953, issued a license (hereinafter referred to as the License) to the Power Authority of the State of New York for the construction, maintenance, and operation of Project No. 2000, which project represents that portion of the works for the development of power in the International Rapids Section of the St. Lawrence River located within the United States:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes, and as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. Designation of the Power Authority of the State of New York. The Power Authority of the State of New York is hereby declared to be the designee of the Government of the United States of America for the construction of the works referred to in the Order of Approval of the International Joint Commission of October 29, 1952.
SEC. 2. Establishment of United States Section of St. Lawrence River Joint Board of Engineers. There is hereby established the United States Section of the St. Lawrence River Joint Board of Engineers, composed of two members and hereinafter referred to as the United States Section. The Secretary of the Army and the Chairman of the Federal Power Commission are hereby designated members. Each may designate an alternate to act for him as member of the United States Section.
SEC 3. Duties of the United States Section. The United States Section shall represent the Government of the United States on the Joint Board of Engineers in the performance of the duties specified in condition (g) of the Order of Approval, and is authorized to act with the Canadian Section in the approval of the plans and specifications of the works and the programs of construction thereof, submitted for approval of the respective Governments as required by the Order of Approval, and to assure the construction of the works in accordance with such approval.
SEC. 4. Assistance to the United States Section. The Department of the Army and the Federal Power Commission are authorized to furnish such assistance, including facilities, supplies and personnel, to the United States Section as may be consonant with law and necessary for the purpose of effectuating this order.
SEC. 5. Reports to the President. The United States Section shall submit its final report to the President upon the completion of construction and shall submit such Interim reports as may appear to be desirable.
SEC. 6. Effective date. This order shall be effective upon the date that the License becomes final.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
November 4, 1953.