Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 27, 1957

Joint Statement Following Discussions Between the Secretary of State, on Behalf of the President, and the King of Morocco
HIS MAJESTY Mohamed V, King of Morocco, and the Secretary of State, on behalf of the President of the United States, concluded today a series of friendly and fruitful discussions in the spirit of the historic friendship which has characterized relations between their two countries since the earliest days of the American Republic.
The President, toward the conclusion of these talks, personally expressed to His Majesty his deep regret that his illness rendered it impossible for him to participate fully in the discussions, as he had so greatly desired to do.
His Majesty expressed his profound sorrow at the President's indisposition, his fervent wishes for a rapid recovery and his satisfaction at the opportunity to discuss matters of mutual concern with the Secretary of State.
In their talks, His Majesty and the President reaffirmed the close ties and high mutual respect between the governments and peoples of Morocco and the United States. They reasserted on behalf of their governments their firm attachment to the principles of the United Nations Charter and their determination to continue to cooperate in advancing the objectives of that vital instrument for peace.
In this spirit, which underlay the examination of specific aspects of the relationship between the two countries, the Secretary of State assured His Majesty of the readiness of the Government of the United States to assist the Kingdom of Morocco in its efforts to stabilize and expand its economy. For this purpose the Government of the United States will continue to under take in Morocco programs of economic and technical assistance to be jointly agreed upon between the two countries.
So far as concerns the installations of the United States in Morocco, the two Governments confirmed their desire to pursue the negotiations now in progress with full respect for the sovereignty of Morocco. Pending conclusion of an agreement, the two Governments expressed their desire to proceed, by means of a provisional solution, to the appropriate adjustments of present conditions regarding the armed forces of the United States in Morocco.
His Majesty and the Secretary of State also exchanged views on the general world situation, and, in this connection, expressed their devotion to the objectives of peace and stability in North Africa.
His Majesty, the King of Morocco, stressed the great interest which he has in the Algerian problem, its direct and multiple repercussions on the situation of Morocco and on its relations with the West. He expressed the wish that a peaceful solution shall come about through friendly negotiations and on the basis of the rights of peoples for self-determination. The Secretary of State assured His Majesty that the Government of the United States continues firmly to favor a peaceful, democratic and just solution to the problem.
His Majesty and the Secretary concluded their conversations with an expression of the intention of the two governments to continue in the future through their diplomatic representatives such valued exchanges of views as those just concluded.