Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 22, 1954

Message to the Conference of Ministers of Finance and Economy Meeting in Rio de Janeiro.
I AM VERY PLEASED to send greetings and best wishes to the Meeting of Ministers of Finance and Economy of the American family of nations, convened in Rio de Janeiro, the capital of our great sister nation, Brazil. I am happy to send this message through our Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. George M. Humphrey who, as Chairman of the United States Delegation, speaks for our nation and will authoritatively present our policies.
I am confident that this Conference will advance still further the unique relationships which have developed among the peoples and nations of this Hemisphere. As those relationships evolved and grew, the people of the United States learned to call their own attitude toward their sister nations the policy of the Good Neighbor. Today, the bonds which unite us as sovereign equals who are working side by side for the betterment of all of us--nations and citizens--have elevated this neighborly relationship to one of genuine partnership.
No longer is it sufficient to maintain the mutual respect and cordiality of neighbors, useful and pleasant as that is. In the world of today, the well-being and the economic development--as well as the security--of all peace-loving nations are so closely interrelated that we must be partners. If this is true in the larger context, it is especially true among the American Republics where we share the same traditions and many of the same favorable circumstances for progress.
As the Conference discusses a wide variety of measures for economic and financial cooperation in this Hemisphere, and endorses those that are sound and durable, I earnestly hope that the meeting as a whole may join with the Delegation of the United States in common dedication to the Policy of the Good Partner.
To this may I add my best wishes for the success of the Conference and warm personal greetings to each of its members.
Note: The message was read by Secretary Humphrey at the plenary session on November 23, 1954, as part of his address.