Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 10, 1954

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Prime Minister Yoshida of Japan.
PRESIDENT Eisenhower and Prime Minister Yoshida met on November 9 and reaffirmed the spirit of friendly cooperation characterizing the relations between the United States and Japan. The Prime Minister also met with Secretary of State Dulles, Secretary of Treasury Humphrey, Secretary of Defense Wilson, and Director Stassen of the Foreign Operations Administration. The Prime Minister and Secretary Dulles at their meetings this week, after a full and frank exchange of views on matters of mutual interest, reviewed the conversations held during the past three weeks by representatives of the two governments.
I.
The President and the Prime Minister agreed that the solidarity and determination of the free nations had greatly advanced the cause of world peace. They declared that their governments would, in cooperation with the free nations of Asia, continue their united efforts to maintain and promote the peace and prosperity of Asia. The Prime Minister reaffirmed his government's determination to make a full contribution to those efforts and in particular stressed Japan's desire to cooperate, wherever possible, in the development of economic strength by the free nations of Asia.
The President and the Prime Minister declared that the goals of their governments are peaceful and that their peoples desire peace and liberty' for themselves and their neighbors.
II.
Representatives of both governments discussed Japan's economic situation in detail. It was agreed that the economic well-being of the Japanese people is a matter of importance to the entire free world. The achievement of improved economic conditions in Japan depends partly upon the ability of the Japanese people themselves to pursue sound and constructive internal monetary and other economic policies and partly upon Japan's ability to expand its trade with other countries. By various means since the end of the war the United States has been able to contribute substantially to the economic progress which Japan has achieved. The United States is aware of the efforts which Japan is making to solve its difficult economic problems and will continue to examine sympathetically means whereby it can assist the Japanese people to advance their well-being.
A number of specific measures were discussed in the recent talks. General agreement was reached that the United States would cooperate with Japan in its efforts to expand its foreign trade and achieve a better balance in its foreign economic relations. It was further agreed that the United States would sell to Japan agricultural commodities and that a substantial portion of the proceeds of these sales will be used for Japan's domestic economic improvement and defense support and for regional economic development. Other steps were discussed, such as the establishment of a productivity program in Japan and the mutual benefits which might arise from Japan's participation with the other free nations of South and Southeast Asia in the economic development of that area. Both sides agreed that these measures would be of marked benefit to Japan by improving its economic position and facilitating its efforts to attain a higher standard of living.
III.
United States representatives expressed regret over the incident on March 1 in which 23 Japanese fishermen were injured--one fatally--by the fall-out of radioactive materials following a nuclear test in the Pacific. They emphasized their belief that peaceful uses of atomic energy would be steadily developed and would eventually become of great value to Japan and other friendly nations throughout the world.
IV.
There was also discussion of the disposition of Japanese assets vested by the United States and representatives of the United States stated that this matter is under consideration. Among other subjects reviewed were Communist efforts to weaken and discredit the operations of free governments in Asia, the request of Japan for expedited consideration of the cases of war criminals, and the status of the Ryukyu and Bonin Islands in the light of the present international situation as well as the desire of Japan for the return to the Bonin Islands of former inhabitants.