Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 30, 1955

Letter Accompanying Medallion for Presentation to Sir Winston Churchill on His 81st Birthday.
[Released November 30, 1955. Dated November 26, 1955]
Dear Winston:
This medallion, struck to commemorate your eighty-first birthday, is a timely recognition both of your lifelong friendship toward the United States and of the incalculable debt owed you by all mankind for your unfaltering defense of peace with justice, and the freedom of men.
The English-speaking peoples--and the entire world--are the better for the wisdom of your counsel, for the inspiration of your unflagging optimism and for the heartening example of your shining courage. You have been a towering leader in the quest for peace, as you were in the battle for freedom through the dark days of war.
In that light, the medallion is a token of America's enduring gratitude. But more than that, it sharpens in our minds today the eternal faith that the forces of evil cannot triumph over men whose courage is many times fortified by dedication to human freedom, to human rights, to the God-guided destiny of free men.
Warm sentiment is mingled with gratitude as I send this medallion, provided by American friends of yours, to commemorate your birthday. Millions of my countrymen join me in tribute to you on this anniversary and in best wishes for long and happy years ahead.

With warm regard,

As ever,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This letter was released at Gettysburg, Pa.
The presentation was made in England by Ambassador Winthrop W. Aldrich. The face of the gold medallion bears a representation of Sir Winston's head and shoulders, as taken from the President's portrait of him. The following citation is inscribed on the reverse, together with a design of clasped hands flanked by British and United States shields:
"Presented to Sir Winston Spencer Churchill by President Dwight D. Eisenhower on behalf of his millions of admiring friends in the United States for courageous leadership and in recognition of his signal services to the defense of freedom in which cause his country and the United States have been associated in both peace and war."
The medallion was designed by Gilroy Roberts, head sculptor and engraver of the United States mint.