Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 24, 1960

Remarks Broadcast to the Mexican People, Ciudad Acuna, Mexico.
Mr. President and my Mexican friends of this lovely city:
In my journey from southern California to Houston, Texas, I could not possibly have come this close to the territory of our great country and friend here to our southward without attempting to make a call upon your President and your people.
Your President and I first met in Acapulco. We then made one resolve, to make certain that our two peoples would be greater friends than ever before, and that between us--us two--there would be a friendship that would be indestructible.
For this particular visit there are certain particular reasons. This is the 150th anniversary this year--the 150th anniversary of Mexican independence, an event I assure you that means just as much to the people of my country as it does to the people of yours.
This is also probably the last time I shall be able to visit your country and your President as long as I hold my particular office, and it was only fitting, I thought, that I should attempt to make upon your President an official call, as well as a personal one, to assure him of the high value I have placed upon the friendship that he has shown to my people and to me. And this visit gives to your great and distinguished President, and to me, an opportunity jointly to promise to your people and to our people to the northward that the Amistad Dam will be built.
We know what this will mean to people on both sides of this river, in flood protection, in production of power, and in production of more irrigated lands. But it is more than this; this is a symbol of what two countries working together in peace can accomplish. And I point out that this thing here that marks the 150th anniversary of your independence also marks the 15th anniversary of the United Nations.
We two nations have given to the United Nations a real example of how to solve their problems through peaceful negotiation, through refusing to be balked by technical difficulties, but with the spirit on both sides aimed at high and noble purposes that can bring about the kind of thing that the United Nations should do every day, every month, every year, until peace has finally been achieved in the world.
Mr. President, I thank you from my heart for your invitation that enabled me to come here and personally and officially express to you and to your people the esteemed admiration and affection of our people, and again to reaffirm to you personally my great and affectionate regard for a man whom I deem to be one of the leaders of this world, and a man who will be so useful in the United Nations to make certain that the world does progress toward peace.

[ At this point the Mayor of Ciudad Acuna, Lucina Sanchez Martinez, presented the President with the key to the city. The President's response follows: ]
Mr. Mayor:
I am honored by this gift, but I must warn you, sir, that this is not something that I intend to give up along with my office. It will be my hope, one day, to come across the bridge and unlock the gates of this city, so that I may come again to see you.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President's remarks, which were delivered from the balcony of the Municipal Building in Ciudad Acuna at 12:50 p.m., were also broadcast locally over the radio. His opening words "Mr. President" referred to President Adolfo Lopez Mateos of Mexico.