Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 27, 1953

Remarks at the Presentation of Seven Congressional Medals of Honor
My friends:
We have gathered here to symbolize the gratitude of America to seven young men who have won her Medal of Honor. As we assemble on such an occasion, I think there are a number of thoughts that must cross our minds. One of the first and natural ones is that if you ever have to get in a fight, you would like to have these seven on your side. Certainly we view with almost incredulity the tales that we hear told in these citations. It seems impossible that human beings could stand up to the kind of punishment they received and deliver the kind of service they have.
But I think the most predominating thought would be: could we be so fortunate that this would be the last time such a group ever gathered together at the White House to receive the Medal of Honor, a battlefield decoration?
Now of course, it is obvious that the future belongs to youth. In very special measure it belongs to these young men, because they have done so much. They must do more. Any man who wins the Nation's highest decoration is marked for leadership. And he must exert it.
And now, instead of leading in battle, they must lead toward peace. They must make certain that no other young men follow them up to these steps to receive the Medal of Honor. That is the service that the United States would like finally to give to all seven of you as their decoration.
So, along with our gratitude, with our salute to great soldiers, our affection to you and to your families, goes also our hope that you will be instrumental in bringing about a situation where there will be no more Medals of Honor.
Thank you very much.
NOTE: The President spoke on the North Portico of the White House at 12:20 p.m. He presented medals to 1st Lt. Raymond G. Murphy, USMCR, 1st Lt. James L. Stone, USA, 2d Lt. George H. O'Brien, Jr., USMCR, Sgt. David B. Bleak, USA, Sgt. Hiroshi H. Miyamura, USA, Pfc. Alford L. McLaughlin, USMCR, and Pfc. Robert E. Simanek, USMCR. The citations were read by Comdr. Edward L. Beach, Naval Aide to the President.