Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 15, 1956

Remarks in the Cabinet Room at a Ceremony Marking the Beginning of the Upper Colorado River Project, Glen Canyon Dam, Arizona.
TODAY WE ARE MARKING the beginning of the actual work on this great storage project. These dams, giant as they are-one of them, I believe, 700 feet and the other 400 feet--are much more than just big masonry projects. We are, first of all, conserving one of our most precious resources: water, to use it where and when it is needed.
As a result of that, all the way down to the Gulf, we will have lands coming into cultivation when they are needed. We will have additional hydro-electric power for the expanding economy of the region; and we will have all sorts of benefits in the added jobs and industry that will spring up from these structures.
The project itself is a good example of one phase of the partnership principle which this Administration believes in as applying to the conservation of resources. It happens to be one of those that is too far-reaching in its effect, too gigantic in size, to be handled by local authorities and local resources. And so the government gladly steps in, glad to do it.
So, you see, in every way I am delighted to be here to participate in this ceremony, as I know you people are.
I am told that when I press this button, there are going to be 500 tons of earth go in the air--and rock--and I assume that you are all safely protected from any effects of that.
Now, are you about ready, out there, Arthur, for me to do the rest of this?
All right, Arthur, this is a pleasure. Here we go. [Pressing the button.]
The work ought to be now started.
How high did the highest rock go that you saw?
All right, Arthur. Congratulations to everybody there. My best wishes to everybody and I hope the construction people run into nothing but good luck all the way through.
Goodbye--goodbye.
Note: During the ceremony the President was conversing by telephone with Arthur V. Watkins, U. S. Senator from Utah, who was at the site of the project.