Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 28, 1958

Remarks to the Citizens for Eisenhower-Nixon 958 Committee, New York City.
Mr. Chairman--and my folks, because, you know, you're my boys and girls:
Probably no one except those of this group and of other groups like it, in 1951 and 1952, had so much to do in persuading me that there was a political role left for me that I should undertake as have groups just like you.

And indeed, there has been nothing so wonderful for me in these past six years in that, first, you approved of what we tried to do in the first four, and re-affirmed your decision; but throughout that time have always been ready to lend a helping hand.
And when Citizens offer to give me an opportunity to help in what I believe to be good government, by saying again they will finance a national hookup, whatever the time, whatever the place, if it's humanly possible, I'll be there.
This may not be such good news for some of my staff whom I drive crazy until we get ready the text that I want to use, but I think they, like yourselves, will be patient until this job can be done and will be cheering as usual, because that is your nature.
You are people that without too much veneration for a name, and the name of a political party, have drawn together because you want one reward, and one only: the best government you can get. And since governments are made up of humans, you try to select the kind of people that you believe will urge and fight for and work for in official position that kind of government, the kind of government in which you believe.
Now you therefore, as I see it, find it not necessary to say that you are always going to be a Republican or a Democrat, or what-have-you, but as long as you are always for good government and you can find in a party the kind of people that you believe would best serve your interests-not selfish interests, not the individual interests of the moment, but America's interests and therefore yours, then of course you can affiliate yourself at any time you choose with that party.
And needless to say, I am very proud that since 1952 you have affiliated yourselves with the Republicans.
Now I feel a kinship to this crowd, for another reason: until 1952, early 1952, when I was past 61 years old, I certainly had no political name other than citizen. I was exactly what the rest of you are. I never admitted I was a Republican, and certainly I never admitted I was a Democrat. And so I felt exactly as you did--and do: who are the people, where is the group, that will advance those ideals of equality of opportunity, the ideals of human dignity, the kind of freedoms and liberties in which we believe? Where are they?
Now I hold at this time, at least in these years, they are very largely, or at least enough of them, in our party that it deserves our kind of support, and the support of this group. I believe you need it in Albany, and consequently I am delighted that you, within your State, organized Citizens for Rockefeller. I believe we should have a Senator in the United States Senate who equals your Senior Senator now in experience and understanding of national problems--a man who, like you, is dedicated to decency and honesty, thrift and economy in government. And Ken Keating has made that kind of reputation. He is respected in the halls of Congress and throughout the Executive Department. And I could not think of a better addition to the United States Senate that we could have, if you people succeed in sending him down there.
I think I should have told you, as I mentioned Nelson, that he also worked with me for a number of years in Washington in a number of tasks, and I think you must know his record: he performed brilliantly.
So I think that your confidence that you are electing a splendid Governor can be just as great as that you are sending down to Washington a good, fine new Senator.
I just came from another meeting--I do a lot of politicking today, in spite of what you said--but this was a special thing about Ken Keating. Several people, and I suppose they are serf-appointed experts, but they say that Ken's face is not well enough known in the city here to assure him of the kind of majority he ought to have when he goes down there so that he speaks with authority and they can't say he was a fifteen-man landslide. We need every vote we can get, and we need them in the city. And I asked over in the Republican headquarters, that every one of you as a worker should carry around a picture of this man, if they don't know his face. Show it to them, say "Here he is; here's our boy."
I don't know how much money there is around here, but maybe we can get some money to get him on the television once in a while. Showing him will help, because his record is good enough. And they just told me, as I rode down Madison Avenue--the advertising experts, maybe they can help us out-- don't know, but we have just got to do it.
Now although I am just talking to you as citizens and talking about good government in terms of the individuals you believe have faith and can do the things that you believe good government should be doing, I would not want to let you into any doubt as to my belief that the Republican Party today, its vast majority, its ninety-nine-and-four-tenths percent majority, is trying to give you the kind of government you want. They believe in sane programs, instead of hysterical programs. They are not trying to buy your vote by taxes, they are not trying to buy freedom, they are not trying to buy peace. They are trying to work for these things, like anyone else has to do.
Every citizen today must take, each of us, take to his or her head and heart, these problems, and what is it that we want and need. And I believe that each of us cannot afford to talk about or think about these problems, and study these problems in too narrow or selfish a basis. Sometimes you might like it, where government would do something, whether it be city or county--they may give you a special parking place or something else, whatever it is, that is not the kind of thing we are talking about.
We are talking about that direction and influence that a government can exercise in order that there is an atmosphere of freedom where the human is respected, where when there is difficulty in emergency or disaster that he is helped. But we do not give him a pair of crutches every time he has a nail in his foot or any other thing that slows up his walk for the moment.
We help, but we do not dominate. And for goodness sake, let's don't try to subsidize.

This is the kind of government, this is the kind of sane policy and feeling and principle that is applied in the foreign field: to be friendly but to be strong, to be ready to conciliate but never to appease.
Those are the kinds of things that we must consider, each for himself, as we determine who are these men that we want in government.
Now ladies and gentlemen, it would be a lot more fun, you know, just to make a list of the things that all your political opponents are doing badly and we are doing so well. That is a very fine thing to do, as you are going up and down the streets getting votes. But the thing that holds us together, that makes us work as a team, that makes you want to see your partner and your associate just as successful as you are, is this belief: that through good government I will get that which is best for me, each of us, for our family, for our friends, for our community, our locality. And we don't get it when we put our whole attention just on the local scene.
Now, goodness knows why I got off on this kind of statement of my beliefs and convictions, but as you know, like some of the other people who are now retiring voluntarily, within two years I retire whether it's voluntary or not. So I am interested, therefore, and I think you can understand that my interest is: for America. There can be nothing

else.
And when I see a group like this, I have the greatest confidence that America is going to remain in the same broad pattern that we have known, that it is going down the great, broad highway of progress, peaceful existence--as far as it can possibly do anything to maintain that peace, but in any event, in honor, in decency, and in pride of this great nation. And that is what I think Citizens believe and are doing.
This has been a tremendous honor you have done me, to allow me to come here before you for these moments, and to let you know something of what is on my heart and mind.

Goodbye and good luck.
Note: The President spoke at the Commodore Hotel at 3:48 p.m. His opening words "Mr. Chairman" referred to Lloyd MacMahon, Chairman, National Citizens for Eisenhower-Nixon 1958 Committee.