Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 01, 1957

Statement by the President Regarding Continued Federal Surveillance at Little Rock.
THE STATEMENT issued this evening by the Governor of Arkansas does not constitute in my opinion the assurance that he intends to use his full powers as Governor to prevent the obstruction of the orders of the United States District Court. Under the circumstances, the President of the United States has no recourse at the present time except to maintain Federal surveillance of the situation.
I want to commend the Governors representing the Southern Governors Conference for their cooperative attitude at the meeting today. I hope that they will continue their efforts, as will the Federal Government, to bring about a basis for the withdrawal of Federal forces in Little Rock and the orderly carrying out of the orders of the District Court.
Note: The statement issued by the Governor of Arkansas was not included in the release. It was later discussed at the President's News Conference of October 3, 1957 (see Item 207 below).
Earlier on October 1 a White House statement announced that the President had met with Governor LeRoy Collins of Florida, Governor Luther Hodges of North Carolina, Governor Theodore McKeldin of Maryland, and Governor Frank Clement of Tennessee. The statement continued as follows:
"At the meeting the Governors informed the President that the Governor of Arkansas had authorized them to state that he is prepared to assume full responsibility for maintaining law and order in Little Rock and, in connection therewith, will not obstruct the orders of the Federal Courts.
"The President stated that upon a declaration on the part of the Governor of Arkansas that he will not obstruct the orders of the Federal Courts and will in connection therewith maintain law and order in Little Rock, the President will direct the Secretary of Defense to return the command of the Arkansas National Guard to the Governor. Thereupon, as soon as practicable, all Federal troops will be withdrawn."