Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 19, 1959

Letter to the Attorney General Directing Him To Petition for an Injunction in the Steel Strike.
Dear Mr. Attorney General:
On October 9, 1959, by virtue of the authority vested in me by Section 206 of the Labor-Management Relations Act, 1947, I issued Executive Order No. 10843, creating a Board of Inquiry to inquire into the issues involved in a labor dispute between certain corporations or organizations in the United States producing or fabricating steel or the components thereof and certain of their employees represented by the United Steel Workers of America. On October 14, 1959, Executive Order No. 10843 was amended by Executive Order No. 10848 so as to extend the time in which the Board was required to report to me.
This morning, October 19, 1959, I received the Board's written report in the matter. A copy of that report is attached.
In my opinion this unresolved labor dispute has resulted in a strike affecting a substantial part of an industry engaged in trade, commerce, and transportation among the several States and with foreign nations, and in the production of goods for commerce, which strike will, if permitted to continue, imperil the national health and safety.
Therefore, in order to remove a peril to the national health and safety and to secure a resumption of trade, commerce, and transportation among the several States and with foreign nations and the production of goods for commerce, I direct you, pursuant to the provisions of Section 208 of the Labor-Management Relations Act, 1947, to petition in the name of the United States any District Court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties to enjoin the continuance of such strike and for such other relief as may in your judgment be necessary or appropriate.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: On October 21 the Attorney General sought and obtained in the District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania an injunction against the continuation of the strike. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the injunction in a decision handed down on November 7 (361 U.S. 39).
The terms of settlement were reached on January 4, 1960. The Board's reports of October 19, 1959, and January 6, 1960, were made available through the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.