Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 23, 1954

Remarks in Gettysburg to a Group of Republican Candidates.
Mr. Chairman, Governor Fine--and what soon, at least, we can call my fellow Pennsylvanians:
When a little boy does his lesson well in school and then the principal happens to come around, he is frequently called upon to repeat it. All the other students present are supposed to act a little astonished, even though they have heard it before.
Now the photographers today decided that they liked the message I, read to you a little while ago, and they would like to take a picture while it is being read. So I promised to repeat that particular performance.
This is to the President, from Secretary Dulles. "I am happy to inform you that everything, including Saar, has now been signed, sealed and delivered. I know you will rejoice with me that the unity and freedom of Europe, to which you contributed so indispensably, seems likely now to be preserved. Faithfully yours, Foster."
I cannot tell you, my friends, how much that message means. I met a group with Mrs. Eisenhower over at the Pennsylvania Monument a few minutes ago, and I told them that as I drove onto the battlefield, a corner of which we are now occupying, I could not help thinking that on this peaceful day how naturally it is that our thoughts should turn to peace. When I stop to think of what the world has to face, unless we do bring about a confidence in a growing world stability and peace, I am inspired to go back to work twice as hard as I did before.
And so you can imagine with what tremendous satisfaction I report to you people today that in my opinion the events of the late months have brought us measurably nearer the day when we not only can say that confidence is growing, but when we can say this dream begins to come definitely within our grasp.
We had seen the terrible threat in Iran disappear. That annoying situation in Suez has been composed. The sensitiveness of the Trieste question has been removed. The first beachhead of communism in the United States, at Guatemala, has been eliminated by the Guatemalans themselves. And the Caracas agreement stands as a sure defense among all Americans that it cannot succeed in establishing itself here.
Now today, after all these years of work and study, and patience-prodding and urging and pleading and arguing: here we have this message. Truly it is one that I think gives us real reason for rejoicing.
Now there is, of course, with respect to this political campaign in which we are all so deeply interested, little of a factual character that I can say to you people today that would be new to you. Most of you are far, far more experienced in politics than I.
There is one field, though, in which I think I am competent to speak a bit, and that is on the general subject of fighting.
And in its way, a political contest is a fight. A fight is half-won when the cause for which any side is fighting is one that fills them with inspiration, one in which they fervently believe, one which represents values which to them are priceless.
That, I submit, the Republican Party has today.
The party of moderation in Government, coupled with progress, with absolute humanity and sympathy toward every person who needs the help of Government, but with absolute conservatism when the economy of this country is involved, that kind of road to progress is one that we see--is that shining road that leads forward to a peaceful, secure, and bright future. That is what we are working for.
I am often reminded of the story of Cromwell's army. You know, there has been a sort of understanding, or belief, among many people that an army could not have at one and the same time a very high order of discipline and a very high order of esprit, elan, morale.
Well, there probably never was an army so highly disciplined as was Cromwell's, but it was far from being a regimented group. They went into battle singing hymns. They went into battle because they wanted to go. They believed in something. And no matter how mistaken we may today believe that they were, in their beliefs and in their convictions, it absorbed their whole hearts. It was almost a glory to die.
We are held together; as I see it, our discipline is devotion to a cause, to furthering the betterment of America. Our elan is because of our belief in that: we know that we shall succeed. We have both the morale and the discipline--the determination to go ahead.
I realize you people have a number of other engagements for the day. Mine, fortunately, I hope, is going to be a couple of hours of looking at the farm, which I hope soon to spend one night in; and not long thereafter to live in--at least on weekends.
Now, I have, by and large, not indulged in what you might call the personalities of this political campaign. Today I think I deserve indeed, I think I possibly owe to myself--a little, let us say, self-given dispensation from this particular inhibition.
I am in the district where my Congressman--or what I soon hope will be my Congressman--is running. It seems to me I have a right to speak of him. I am in a State where I hope that my candidate for Governor will be elected. I know of no reason why I can't exercise the rights of an ordinary citizen, when I am in Gettysburg, and speak out in no uncertain terms in favor of these people.
Now, since my Congressman won't be as powerful down there, unless he is supported by others of his own associations, and beliefs and convictions, I know of no reason why I can't speak out for the Congressmen who are running in Pennsylvania. We want a good solid delegation.
Now, so that all of you can see who I am talking about, I should like, first, for Governor Wood--I will excuse Governor Fine, although we haven't retired him yet--but I want Governor Wood to come up here and look at you. [The rest of the Pennsylvania delegates came up to the podium and had their pictures taken with the President]
Now, ladies and gentlemen, for the warmth of your welcome, and for your courtesies to Mrs. Eisenhower and to me, thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke in a tent at his Gettysburg farm at 1:58 p.m. His opening words "Mr. Chairman, Governor Fine" referred to Milton G. Baker, Superintendent of the Valley Forge Military School, and to Governor John S. Fine of Pennsylvania. Later in his remarks the President referred to Lieutenant Governor Lloyd H. Wood.