Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 16, 1956

Remarks at Rice Park, St. Paul, Minnesota.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thye, the Honorable Ancher Nelsen, whom I hope soon to call Governor--my fellow Americans:
On a day when St. Paul mourns a great citizen--a civic and spiritual leader--I feel that it would be completely improper and unfitting for me to attempt a partisan political speech. Archbishop John Gregory Murray, in his actions and in his words, was a man of principle and high purpose.
Now too easily, in a political campaign, we can get lost in the underbrush of argument and lose sight of the towering trees of purpose and principle.
So I think it is good to take out a few minutes to talk about and to think about America:--
About the great heritage of the past that must be preserved.
About the great enterprise of the present that must be advanced.
About the great vision of the future that must be nourished.
America's greatness, from the very beginning, sprang from spiritual values--from convictions--from a philosophy of life-from a devotion to ideals of human freedom within a society dedicated to the common good.
The mission of America has been--and is--the expansion of individual liberty, self-reliance and personal responsibility within a system where a government--of conscience and of heart--is the servant of every individual, doing for him what he cannot do for himself.
The vision of America is boundless. The American people through their individual dreams and talents and energies create an atmosphere--cultural, political, social, economic--in which the best and most creative qualities of us all can assert themselves.
Out of a heritage of ideals, a mission of freedom, a vision renewed in each generation, has come mighty material prosperity.
But we harm ourselves--and our leadership in the free world-if we become too much occupied with our material blessings. America knows, and may we never forget--that man does not live by bread alone.
We are not a Nation of economic pressure groups--although some may attempt to exploit transient differences into lasting conflicts.
Rather, we are a Republic of free individuals, each working out his own destiny, each making his own contribution in his own way to the common good. At the same time, in the deepest sense, we are a united people, spiritually joined in a tight loyalty to great ideals.
Therein lies the miracle of America.
The Republic has demonstrated that human freedom works.
And it works with a purpose--the purpose of making the world a richer, finer and a nobler place for ourselves and for those who come after us.
As each of us seeks out his road to happiness, this purpose is behind our daily work--whether we are laborers or artists, or businessmen, or farmers, or musicians, or public servants--whatever our calling may be.
This purpose inspires the devotion of more than a million teachers in our public and church and private schools; of our hundreds of thousands of doctors and nurses and ministers of the gospel; of all those of good will who, in unsung contribution, have chosen to give their lives to the unselfish service of their fellows.
This is the America our fathers began and carried forward in their time. This is the America that you have helped build. This is the America that daily you are helping to mold and shape. This is the America that our children must inherit.
Archbishop Murray, certainly, was one of the architects of such an America.
In the light of his and their lives, a political campaign seems a futile exchange of argument unless it produces in those who participate:
First, a rededication to the American heritage of spiritual values.
Next, a revitalization of the American mission of freedom for all men.
A renewal of the American vision that the good of all is the job of all; that the freedom of all is the concern of all; that government for all is government by all.
If we hold steadfast to those purposes, rising above partisan animosity and contrived fears, each of us can aspire to be a builder of peace.
Peace must begin at home and in the community before it broadens out across the continent and embraces the world.
Archbishop Murray, a pastor of his people, a man of peace, worked all his days for those same purposes. Whatever our faith may be, each of us can walk in his spirit to the peaceful profit of our country and of the whole world.
My dear friends, I am more than grateful that you have come out this morning to give me a chance to bring to you a word of welcome from Mamie and me, to thank you for your cordiality, your hospitality, and your welcome--and to say God Bless You.
Note: The President spoke at noon. His opening words "Mr. Chairman" referred to George F. Etzell, Republican National Committeeman.