Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 21, 1956

Letter to President Hoover Concerning the Progress Made in Carrying Out the Hoover Commission Recommendations.
[Released October 21, 1956. Dated October 15, 1956]
Dear Mr. Hoover:
I have just received and am pleased to send on to you a report on the progress which has been made in carrying out the recommendations of the Second Hoover Commission. It indicates strong support throughout the Executive Branch for the bulk of the recommendations contained in the report.
The Departments and Agencies of the Executive Branch have completed a thoroughgoing study of the recommendations applicable to them, and their comments have been undergoing careful review. During the last few months we have also addressed ourselves to the important task of implementation. I am encouraged by what seems to me to be a satisfactory degree of progress, but obviously a great deal more needs to be done.
A number of the most important recommendations require Congressional action. With bi-partisan support, a modest start was made at the last session of the Congress. I propose to transmit further specific legislative proposals to the next session of the Congress, and I am hopeful that these will receive the wholehearted bi-partisan support which they merit.
As additional recommendations in the report are put into effect, I am sure that there will be increasing recognition of the great contribution made by your Commission. Your own contribution to the betterment of Government over the years, and particularly through the two Commissions which bore your name and profited by your leadership, has earned the deep appreciation of the Nation as well as my own.
With warm wishes for your continued good health,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The report, entitled "Interim Report on the Status of the Hoover Commission Recommendations," is in the form of a memorandum for the President, prepared by Meyer Kestnbaum, Special Assistant to the President. The report notes that of 479 recommendations received, 370 had been acted upon. Of these, 313 (85 percent) had been accepted wholly or in part, and 193 had already been put into effect or would soon be in operation.