Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 18, 1957

Remarks at the Presentation of the National Geographic Society Medal to His Royal Highness the Prince Philip.
YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESS, one of the most highly respected and esteemed organizations of our country is the National Geographic Society.
For me it is a very great privilege to act as their representative in presenting to you this Medal, so well earned for the reasons given in the Citation, and particularly because you are here on a state visit to our country and as the personal friend of so many Americans--among whom I proudly number myself.
So it is a very great pleasure to hand you this, on behalf of the Society, and my congratulations.
Note: The President referred to the inscription on the Medal: "National Geographic Society Special Gold Medal awarded to H. R. H. the Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, whose questing spirit has taken him to the far corners of the globe and brought to millions a better understanding of our planet and its peoples."
The presentation was made in the Cabinet Room of the White House at 10:05 a. m. Prince Philip's remarks on accepting the Medal follow:
Thank you very much.
Well, Mr. President and Mr. Grosvenor, I can hardly believe that this has happened. All I can say is that I don't really deserve this because I know what others have done to get it and my contribution has been very small.
I have read the National Geographic off and on for several years, but when your letter arrived offering me this Medal and to write an article which you put in, I can only say that I was amazed, particularly about the article, because I know that you have to sell your magazine.
We have heard quite a lot in recent years about the need for better understanding between the English speaking peoples. I think that this gesture of yours and the article which you have read and put in your magazine is a practical and concrete contribution to a better understanding between the English-speaking peoples.
Thank you very much indeed.