Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 05, 1954

Exchange of Messages Between the President and President Tito of Yugoslavia on the Trieste Agreement.
His Excellency

Marshal Josip Broz-Tito

President of the Federal Peoples Republic of Yugoslavia
Permit me on behalf of the American people personally to extend my warm congratulations to you and to the other members of your government at the achievement of an agreement on the Trieste problem. This agreement, worked out with good will, patience and unremitting endeavor, reflects honor upon your government, for the broad, farsighted statesmanship which has made this agreement possible.
I am sure that you share with me the sense of optimism engendered by the agreement. All of the peoples of the free nations of Europe, as well as the American people, will now be encouraged by this arrangement which opens the way to greater security in Southeastern Europe against any possible encroachment and fosters the hope that improved relations between Yugoslavia and Italy will enhance the general welfare and peace in Europe.
I wish to convey to you my deep gratification at this accord which I am convinced will materially contribute to that which is closest to our hearts, the maintenance of peace, of security and of prosperity in the world.
Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: President Tito's reply follows:
To the President of the United States:
Permit me to thank you most cordially on my behalf as well as on behalf of the members of the Yugoslav Government for the extremely warm congratulation you were kind enough to extend to me on the occasion of the agreement achieved on the Trieste problem.
I avail myself of this opportunity to thank you for your great efforts in this matter which came particularly to expression in your message sent through Mr. Murphy and which greatly contributed to the overcoming of the last obstacles and to the reaching of an agreement. I fully share with you the sense of optimism that this agreement will have great significance both for the normalization of relations between Yugoslavia and Italy and for the strengthening of peace and security, not only here but generally in Europe.
I wish to convince you that, regardless of the sacrifices Yugoslavia has made for this agreement, I as well as the other members of the Yugoslav Government feel a satisfaction that in this part of Europe a problem has been settled which had worried the world.
JOSIP BROZ-TITO
The messages were released at Lowry Air Force Base, Denver, Colo.