Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 03, 1953

Executive Order 10485—Providing for the Performance of Certain Functions Heretofore Performed by the President With Respect to Electric Power and Natural Gas Facilities Located on the Borders of the United States
WHEREAS section 202 (e) of the Federal Power Act, as amended, 49 Stat. 847 (16 U.S.C. 824a (e)), requires any person desiring to transmit any electric energy from the United States to a foreign country to obtain an order of the Federal Power Commission authorizing it to do so; and
WHEREAS section 3 of the Natural Gas Act, 52 Stat. 822 (15 U.S.C. 717b), requires any person desiring to export any natural gas from the United States to a foreign country or to import any natural gas from a foreign country to the United States to obtain an order from the Federal Power Commission authorizing it to do so; and
WHEREAS the proper conduct of the foreign relations of the United States requires that executive permission be obtained for the construction and maintenance at the borders of the United States of facilities for the exportation or importation of electric energy and natural gas; and
WHEREAS it is desirable to provide a systematic method in connection with the issuance and signing of permits for such purposes:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States and Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. (a) The Federal Power Commission is hereby designated and empowered to perform the following described functions:
(1) To receive all applications for permits for the construction, operation, maintenance, or connection, at the borders of the United States, of facilities for the transmission of electric energy between the United States and a foreign country.
(2) To receive all applications for permits for the construction, operation, maintenance, or connection, at the borders of the United States, of facilities for the exportation or importation of natural gas to or from a foreign country.
(3) Upon finding the issuance of the permit to be consistent with the public interest, and, after obtaining the favorable recommendations of the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense thereon, to issue to the applicant, as appropriate, a permit for such construction, operation, maintenance, or connection. The Commission shall have the power to attach to the Issuance of the permit and to the exercise of the rights granted thereunder such conditions as the public interest may in its judgment require.
(b) In any case wherein the Federal Power Commission, the Secretary of State, and the Secretary of Defense cannot agree as to whether or not a permit should be issued, the Commission shall submit to the President for approval or disapproval the application for a permit with the respective views of the Commission, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense.
SEC. 2. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Federal Power Commission is hereby designated and empowered to sign any permits issued by the Federal Power Commission pursuant to section 1 (a) (3) hereof.
SEC 3. The Federal Power Commission is authorized to issue such rules and regulations, and to prescribe such procedures, as it may from time to time deem necessary or desirable for the exercise of the authority delegated to it by this order.
SEC. 4. All Presidential Permits heretofore issued pursuant to Executive Order No. 8202 of July 13, 1939, and in force at the time of the issuance of this order, and all permits issued hereunder, shall remain in full force and effect until modified or revoked by the President or by the Federal Power Commission.
SEC 5. Executive Order No. 8202 of July 13, 1939, is hereby revoked.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
September 3, 1953.