Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 30, 1956

Statement by the President Marking the Opening of the United Community Campaigns.
[ Recorded on film and tape ]
My Fellow Citizens:
I would like to talk to you for a few minutes about the United Community Campaigns which are starting right now in cities and towns from coast to coast.
They will be known by different names--the United Fund, the United Crusade, the United Community Chest, and others. But whatever the name, the important word is that word United. For in every city it means that many good and useful voluntary health and welfare agencies have teamed up to ask you just once a year for funds, instead of going out on separate and competing campaigns.
You know these agencies will take care of children--heal the sick in body and mind--bring hope to the handicapped--minister to the aged--guide boys and girls away from delinquency into paths of fine American citizenship.
In many cities, great national causes, such as the Red Cross, the USO--Heart--Cancer--and Crippled Children, are included in these local drives. This kind of unity makes a great deal of sense, for man is a united human being. He is built all in one piece--a body, a mind, and a spirit. And you can't separate the elements and still have a whole human being.
With skill and compassion these agencies unite to serve all the needs of all the people. The word Community lies at the very heart of our American society. There is no such thing as a strong, healthy nation without strong healthy communities. And the community is strong and healthy only when its citizens care enough and share enough to make it that way.
In a political campaign, people in the community divide up into sides and they cast their votes on issues. But in the United Community Campaigns there is only one big issue, and that is: Are we interested in our fellow man?
For us Americans, whatever our politics, racial background or religious faith, there is only one answer, and it is an answer that expresses a genuine and heartfelt concern for our fellow man.
So I am sure that when the volunteer worker knocks at your door and heart, and asks you to sign a pledge for the United Community Campaigns, you will join me with a three word answer: "Yes I will."