Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 23, 1959

Statement by the President Recorded for the Opening of the United Community Campaigns.
My Fellow Americans:
Tonight is the beginning of an enterprise which I believe is in the finest tradition of American generosity--the United Community Campaigns. In some 21 hundred cities and towns throughout the United States and Canada, the solicitors for the United Community Campaigns will shortly begin to ask for our support.
This campaign has many names across the country. Here in Washington we call it the United Givers Fund. In Gettysburg, it is the Community Chest. In my old home town in Kansas, it is the United Fund of Abilene. But whatever the name, the important word is "united." It means that in each community a great number of volunteer agencies are working together to raise money to advance the general welfare.
It would be hard to imagine American life without our volunteer charities and community organizations. These include many services for children, youth and families--services for the blind, the crippled and the handicapped--the Scouting movement, the Salvation Army, the "Y's"-hospitals, clinics, and medical research. It is a long and familiar and heartwarming list.
Some national agencies also take part in the United Campaigns. The American Red Cross, for example, will be a partner in more than a thousand communities. The USO also benefits and through the USO the members of our Armed Forces are served. This year, many of the United Campaigns will include requests for the new Medical Research Program, established by the National Fund for Medical Education.
There is a saying that he who gives is twice blessed, and this is certainly true of those who contribute to our United Community Campaigns. For the spiritual warmth and satisfaction of generous giving is matched by the fact that in helping our fellow Americans about us we are building better, safer, more decent neighborhoods and communities for ourselves and our children.
I hope you will help the United Community Campaigns to set a new record of service to America this year.
Thank you and goodnight.