Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 03, 1959

Remarks at SHAPE Headquarters, Paris.
General Norstad, and Members of SHAPE:
It is for me indeed a homecoming. As I look back over some 45 years of life since I graduated from school and think of the organizations to which I belong, the groups of which I have been a part, the duties that have been laid upon me, I can think of none which has such unique characteristics and has challenged my interest and my attention more than did my service in SHAPE.
Even the wonderful knowledge that you have won a victory in war cannot equal the experience, the feeling, the satisfaction that one has in saying, "I am doing something to promote better living for people-peace and security for humanity."
You are teaching and preaching and living the proposition that patriotism, love of country, can reach out beyond the borders, the geographical borders of a country and beyond the language that each of us may speak, and embrace the idea of freedom.
Because SHAPE and a member of SHAPE is engaged in far more than mere mastery of intricate staff practices and procedures, planning of logistics, and the operation and movement of troops. He is in the pursuit of an ideal that free peoples may, by joining themselves together, make more certain that peace will be for them, for their children, and their grandchildren a greater probability.
This, I submit, is a far worthier ambition in itself than merely to win a battle. For a battle is after all destructive. Its chief purpose is to gain and hold what we have. It does not obtain for us more freedom, greater opportunity, higher standards, greater aspirations.
So this job in which you are now engaged is one that I often feel is part of the work in which I am still engaged, with you, to pursue peace and a better future for all people everywhere, and particularly for those fifteen countries that are embraced in what we call SHAPE.
It has been a great privilege to come back to see you. I am proud of the invitation, because quite frequently I think there have been some places that haven't asked me back. Here they always do, and I am grateful.
Thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 4:30 p.m. His opening words "General Norstad" referred to General Lauris Norstad, Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in Europe.