Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 30, 1958

Statement by the President: Appointment of E. R. Quesada as Administrator, Federal Aviation Agency.
I HAVE TODAY given a recess appointment to E. R. Quesada as Administrator of the federal Aviation Agency, to become effective November 1, 1958.

Before that effective date, Mr. Quesada will resign his Commission as a Lieutenant General on the retired list of the Regular Air force, thereby qualifying under the provision of the law for this appointment. Mr. Queseda's resignation represents a sacrifice which I feel reflects his high sense of public duty.
Mr. Quesada has been active in the field of aviation for thirty-four consecutive years. After twenty-seven years of active service in the Air force, he was placed on the retired list of the Regular Air force in 1951, after which he became engaged in civilian activities as an executive in private industry. Since June 1957, he has served as my Special Assistant for aviation matters which included, among other things, the development within the executive branch of Government of legislation which established the federal Aviation Agency. He has clearly demonstrated his unique knowledge of the complexities and needs of civil and military aviation in the present age. He possesses, in the highest degree, the qualifications to be the first Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency.
The fact that a man of Mr. Quesada's qualifications is obliged to resign his retired status in the Regular Air force to comply with the letter of the law so he can again serve his country does not, in my opinion, seem logical or desirable.
I am confident that it was not the intention of the Congress that in Mr. Quesada's case his additional public service should deprive him of the honors and status acquired during his years of service to his country in the military establishment and, lately, as my Special Assistant.
I hope that the Congress, when it convenes in January, will adopt legislation which will restore him to the status he had prior to his resignation and, at the same time, permit him to serve as Administrator of the federal Aviation Agency.
The effective date of Mr. Quesada's appointment as Administrator is November 1. This will permit him to proceed immediately with the basic organization of the federal Aviation Agency. It also will provide sufficient time to prepare for the effective transfer of all appropriate functions to that Agency on December 31, 1958.