Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 19, 1960

Statement by the President on the Signing of the Treaty Between Pakistan and India Relating to the Waters of the Indus River
I warmly welcome the signing today at Karachi of the Treaty between Pakistan and India by President Ayub and Prime Minister Nehru on the use of the waters of the Indus River and its tributaries. This brings to a salutary close a dispute of major proportions which had existed between these two free world countries since their independence 13 years ago. The livelihood of some 50 million people will be enhanced by the solution of this problem.
The peaceful settlement of this issue marks the inauguration of a new chapter in the conduct of international relations wherein the expert "good offices" of an international organization have served to assist two equally determined nations to reconcile their opposing viewpoints and to reach an amicable agreement over a highly contentious dispute.
President Ayub and Prime Minister Nehru together with their representatives have demonstrated to the world a quality of the highest statesmanship in reaching the compromises necessary to an agreement on this question. President Eugene R. Black and Vice President W. A. B. Iliff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development deserve the highest praise for their years of patient effort in assisting India and Pakistan to negotiate their differences in this matter.
The World Bank must also be commended for subscribing its own financial support and in enlisting the support of six friendly governments to participate in the financing of this enormous project of development of the Indus Basin, without which agreement would not have been possible despite the large investments being made by Pakistan and India themselves.
The United States is proud to be able to participate in this cooperative endeavor in the interest of the economic growth and security of these newly developing nations. It was with great interest that I was able to discuss this matter with President Ayub and Prime Minister Nehru when I was in their capitals last autumn.
The amicable and friendly resolution of this difficult issue with multilateral assistance is a striking example of the value of international cooperation and good will in the pursuit of a lasting peace with justice for all the world.