Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 21, 1960

Message to the fourth General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
[ Read by John A. McCone, Chairman of the United States delegation ]
Mr. President and delegates:
Nearly seven years ago, at the United Nations General Assembly, it was my privilege to give voice to a hope that was rising in many minds and many places.
The hope was to harness the new force of the atom for the benefit of all peoples of all Nations. The challenge was to do it.
The almost universal approval of the Atoms for Peace proposal demonstrated the hope of people everywhere that the great new force of atomic energy would be devoted to the peaceful advancement of mankind.
This International Atomic Energy Agency is one expression of that hope. The historic mission of the Agency was to make a new approach in international cooperation to translate the concept of the peaceful atom into a practical, positive program on a world basis.
In three short years, the Agency has become the prime international organization in the nuclear field. Its activities are stimulating much of the global effort to bring to more people more benefits of this still new atomic age. It is providing sound advice and guidance for the management of the many new atomic projects underway in its member states.
The Agency is making substantial contributions on an international basis in such fields as education and training and technical assistance. It is making great strides in spreading the knowledge of the many uses of the radioisotopes in the fields of medicine, agriculture and industry. In addition, the Agency has a paramount role in the development of the necessary health and safety standards.
This Agency is an organization that has no secrets; an organization devoted to the sharing of effort, research and information; one in which the major powers can lay aside political differences to work for the common good.
In broad outline, I can see the Agency fulfilling the basic purposes of its historic charter and thereby contributing to world peace. I can see it as a unique forum where technical skills and resources are pooled for the benefit of mankind.
The United States is gratified and encouraged at what has been done in three short years. My country will continue to support this organization and I wish for it continued progress and success.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The opening words "Mr. President" referred to Gueorgui Nadjakov, chairman of the Bulgarian delegation. The conference was held in Vienna, September 20-October 1, 1960.