Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 21, 1956

Remarks to Republican Leaders and Precinct Workers and a Group of Newspaper Editors, Des Moines, Iowa.
Governor Hoegh, Senator Hickenlooper, and my fellow Americans:
For the last couple of days I have been very non-political and I can't stand it any more, and I turn over a new leaf right now.
I come just from a trip through your city where Mrs. Eisenhower and I witnessed a turnout that we have certainly never seen in a city anywhere near this size before in our lives. We are deeply grateful.
Now in recent months, my friends, I have been talking a great deal about the Republican Party as the party of the future. In talking about what we expect to be its accomplishments, we naturally assume that we are going to have the finest kind of individuals that this country can produce in positions of authority.
And I want, here, to pay tribute to your two Senators from this State--Senator Hickenlooper and Senator Martin. They have been leaders in what I call Republicanism adjusted to the conditions of modern life. They are progressive Republicans. You have in your Governor the same kind of person; you have in your Republican Members of the Lower House--I don't believe they like that term--the Republican Members of the United States House of Representatives.
If an outsider from your State dare through his in-law relationship to make a recommendation, it would be that you keep these people in their present and higher positions for a long, long time to come--and you will be well served.
I have urged people going out in this political campaign, that are detailed on the team of speechmakers, to remember one thing: they have got a great story to tell, in the simple unadorned truth.
Comparing 1952 to 1956, whether it be on the international or on the internal domestic and economic front, sees 1956 better in every single way.
By no means are Republicans stupid enough to claim credit for every advance that has been made in the last four years. But they have tried and have succeeded, I submit, in establishing an atmosphere in government that encourages every single human being to do his best--assured that what he gains for himself will be under his own initiative and that he can keep it, subject to the necessity of paying his fair share of the taxes that his country demands and needs.
So when we talk about a forward-looking government, we are talking about the kind of government that does its own part in helping to look after the human needs of this country, and then puts every possible part of this authority and responsibility for doing that in the human being himself.
Government does not try to be "big brother knows better than you do." No matter what the problem, whether it be in the field of power or the field of finance, or any other field, we believe that the closer you keep government to home, where the people who pay the taxes can watch that money being spent, with their desire to see it spent efficiently and effectively and economically, that is the best kind of government.
This by no means denies the responsibility of the Federal government to take leadership in a thousand different directions where by its aid, by its credit, by its position of leadership, it can help to solve these great human problems that still remain before us.
That is the Republican Party of today.
That is what your Senators, your Governor, your Members in the House of Representatives are now committed to--and are doing. They are doing it for the good of 168 million Americans.
No less, they are committed to no group, to no special interest, and they yield to no particular pressure. They have one real motive, only one: Is this measure good for 168 million Americans? If it is, get behind it and shove! If it is not, don't let them sell it to you, no matter how attractive it looks for votes or anything else.
My friends, as you well know, I was scheduled merely to bring you greetings. This I do from the bottom of my heart. I thank you for the cordiality of your welcome. I thank you for what you are doing now in this critical period of the election year-making certain that you are registered and ready to vote, making certain that your neighbors are ready to vote.
And I say to you this: In this matter of registration and being prepared to vote, let us see whether we can get 100 percent of Americans out. We have no fear of the judgment of all America. The only thing we need to fear--ever--is the judgment of the minority.
So, even if someone feels they must vote against us, let us still make sure they vote, because the first step toward the losing of our freedoms is refusing to exercise the freedom to vote. That we must do. Let it be your watchword now, and then when you are sure that everybody has voted, remember this: We have got a story that will convert every discerning Democrat, and we can get their votes after we have got them registered.
So, go to it!
God bless you for coming out and giving us this warm greeting. All our friends from Boone and from Des Moines and all over this State of Iowa--thank you very much indeed on behalf of Mrs. Eisenhower and me.
Note: The President spoke at the Municipal Airport at 3:00 p.m.