Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 10, 1953

Executive Order 10445—Reserving Certain Lands Acquired Under Title III of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act as Parts of National Forests
WHEREAS certain lands within the exterior boundaries of national forests have been acquired by the United States through exchange under authority of Title in of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act, 50 Stat. 525, as amended (7 U. S. C. 1010-1013); and
WHEREAS it appears that all such lands are suitable for national-forest purposes, and that it would be in the public interest to reserve such lands as parts of the national forests within which they are located; and
WHEREAS it is contemplated that other lands within the exterior boundaries of national forests will be acquired from time to time by the United States through exchange under authority of the said Title III of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act; and
WHEREAS it appears that it would be in the public interest to reserve all of such lands that are suitable for national forest purposes as parts of the national forests within which they are located:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section 24 of the act of March 3, 1891, 26 Stat. 1095, 1103, as amended (16 U. S. C. 471), the act of June 4, 1897, 30 Stat. 34, 36 (16 U. S. C. 473), and the said Title m of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act, as amended, and upon recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Except as to lands within the States of Arizona, California, Colorado. Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, Oregon, Washington, and Wyoming, (1) all lands within the exterior boundaries of national forests which have been acquired through exchange by the United States under the authority of the said Title in of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act, as amended, are hereby added to and reserved as parts of the respective national forests within which they are located; and (2) all lands within the exterior boundaries of national forests hereafter acquired by the United States through exchange under such authority shall, upon determination by the Department of Agriculture that such lands are suitable for national-forest purposes and upon acquisition of title thereto by the United States, be added to and reserved as parts of the respective national forests within which they are located.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
April 10, 1953.