Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 01, 1957

Special Message to the Congress Recommending Extension of Period for Transmitting Reorganization Plans.
To the Congress of the United States:
The Reorganization Act of 1949, as amended, under which the President is authorized to prepare and transmit to the Congress plans for the reorganization of executive agencies, states that no provision contained in a reorganization plan shall take effect unless the plan is transmitted to the Congress before June 1, 1957.
I recommend that the Congress enact legislation to extend the period for transmitting reorganization plans for four years.
The reorganization plan procedure authorized by the Reorganization Act is an essential means by which the President and the Congress can cooperate to assure the timely promotion of better organization and sound management of the executive branch of the Government. Under the Act, the President may transmit to the Congress reorganization plans which become effective after 60 days of Congressional session unless disapproved by a majority of the membership of one of the Houses of the Congress. This method enables the President, who has direct responsibility for effective administration, to initiate improvements in organization, subject to review by the Congress.
Extensive accomplishments have been achieved under the Reorganization Acts of 1939 and 1945 and under the present statute, the Reorganization Act of 1949. The time for transmitting plans under the latter has been twice extended by the Congress: in 1953 and 1955.
The current Act was adopted following the strong endorsement of the first Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government in 1949, which stated: "This authority is necessary if the machinery of government is to be made adaptable to the ever-changing requirements of administration and if efficiency is to become a continuing rather than a sporadic concern of the Federal Government." In December 1954, the second Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government unanimously recommended further extension of the Act.
Accordingly, I urge the Congress to continue the practical arrangements contained in the Reorganization Act by which the Congress and the President can carry forward their cooperative endeavors to provide the best possible management of the public business.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER