Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 28, 1955

Remarks to the Committee for a National Trade Policy Following Congressional Action on the Proposed Trade Agreements Extension Act.
SINCE you people already know what I think about this, I see very little reason in saying anything except "Thank you," saying that in every language that I know, using every word and every expression, because I am truly grateful. There, of course, have been encouraging developments. The bill having just passed the House, and, after long study and examination in Senate Committee to have come out 13 to 2--at least in its general features--I thought was a tremendous victory. And I know how much you people have had to do with it.
Whatever we do in this regard, though, we must always remember that in projects affecting human affairs, victories are never really won because life is an unending fight, and everything that applies to the welfare of humans is something that goes on and progresses. We never wholly conquer disease. We never wholly conquer ignorance. We will never have perfection. So that there will always be a struggle going on to balance against the hope of immediate and sometimes selfish gain the long-term good of a great nation and of a whole world. That is the kind of thing in which you have engaged yourselves and along which you have come so far already.
But it will continue. I merely beg of you not to look at any one skirmish as a victory in a campaign or in a war. As you know, the administration is dedicated in many ways not only through H.R. 1 but through other plans and methods to breaking down barriers--tiresome and burdensome customs procedures and all the rest of it--around the world. The administration is dedicated not only to promote trade between ourselves and another country, but between those countries as among themselves, so as to increase our prosperity and make them better customers of OURS.
I really believe that in this whole field of international trade, we must think of it as the greatest instrument or weapon in the hands of the diplomat as he strives to promote peace. We must think of it also as the connecting/ink, really, between a prosperous economy here at home, widely shared, and a growing and stronger free world capable of marching without fear of attack, fear of any kind of interference on the part of potential enemies. toward a better and a brighter future for all of us.
So, believing those things so deeply in my heart, you can understand that I don't really have the words in which to say "thank you" adequately. But I do assure you I mean it.

Good luck to all of you.

Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden at 3:00 p.m.