Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 16, 1954

Exchange of Messages Between the President and the President of France and the Chief of State of Viet-Nam Concerning the Defenders of Dien Bien Phu.
IN COMMON with millions of my countrymen, I salute the gallantry and stamina of the Commander and soldiers who are defending Dien Bien Phu. We have the most profound admiration for the brave and resourceful fight being waged there by troops from France, Vietnam, and other parts of the French Union. Those soldiers, true to their own great traditions, are defending the cause of human freedom and are demonstrating in the truest fashion qualities on which the survival of the free world depends. I would be grateful if you would convey to the Commander of the gallant garrison of Dien Bien Phu this expression of my admiration and best wishes.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Identical messages were sent to President Coty of France and to the Chief of State of Viet-Nam, Bao Dai.
President's Coty's reply follows:
I have transmitted without delay, to the fighting men of Dien Bien Phu and to their chiefs the message you sent to me. The Expeditionary Corps and the National Armies of the Associated States are fighting in Indo China not only for the safeguard and the independence of the Associated States but also for the common ideal adopted by the whole free world, as our American friends know so well. Our soldiers will proudly welcome this testimony by the former Commanderin-Chief, who led the allied troops to victory in the fight against oppression.
RENE COTY
The reply from the Chief of State of Viet-Nam follows:
At moment when all who here participate in battle for dignity of man are bound by anxiety and animated by hope your message is a precious comfort.
The moving battle of Dien Bien Phu symbolizes the determination of communism to impose its rule without regard for the suffering of the people. Also opens all eyes to reality of force and wills which refuse to bow before the Red despotism.
Before this dramatic circumstance, the Vietnamese people unite in determination and recognizing the disinterested aid given them by the great American nation address to it the expression of their gratitude and friendship.
BAO DIA
The messages were released at Augusta, Ga.