Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 07, 1953

Message to the Members of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.
I AM ASKING Mrs. Oswald B. Lord, the new Representative of the United States on the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, to express to the Commission my deep personal interest in its work. In these days of international tension and strain, it is encouraging to know that the members of the Commission on Human Rights are working to develop effective programs to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms for all people and all nations throughout the world.
The United Nations Charter states the human rights goals which the United States and the other Members of the United Nations have pledged themselves to achieve in cooperation with the United Nations--the promotion of universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion.
For the people of the United States as well as for people everywhere, the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a significant beacon in the steady march toward achieving human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
People everywhere are seeking freedom--freedom to live, freedom from arbitrary restraint, freedom to think and speak as they wish, freedom to seek and find the truth. We must press ahead to broaden the areas of freedom. The United States is convinced that freedom is an indispensable condition to the achievement of a stable peace.
Unfortunately, in too many areas of the world today there is subjugation of peoples by totalitarian governments which have no respect for the dignity of the human person. This denial of the freedom of peoples, the continued disregard of human rights, is a basic cause of instability and discontent in the world today.
For these reasons, the work of the Commission on Human Rights assumes greater importance and meaning. For these reasons also, there is need for a new approach to the development of a human rights conscience in all areas of the world. I have accordingly asked Mrs. Lord to present positive UN action programs to the Commission which we feel will contribute to that recognition of human rights and fundamental freedoms which people are seeking throughout the world.
Note: The United Nations Commission on Human Rights convened in Geneva on April 7. A statement by Mrs. Lord before the Commission on April 8, outlining the new approach mentioned in the President's message, is published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 98, p. 581).