Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 11, 1953

Letter to the Governors of the States Inviting Them to a Conference at the White House.
[Released April 11, 1953. Dated April 9, 1953]
Dear___________:
It is with great pleasure that I extend to you and the Governors of the other States of the nation a most cordial invitation to attend a conference here in the White House on May fourth and fifth, for the purpose of participating in confidential discussions relating to problems facing America and the free world in these most difficult times.
It is my earnest conviction that you will find this conference a worthwhile occasion. The program will give consideration, among other matters of national concern, to current developments in the field of international relations, the American defense effort, the problems of national security, and an analysis of our fiscal policies as related thereto. The presentation by Cabinet members and officials charged with the responsibility of administering these affairs will be designed to give you a first-hand picture of the present state of the world and the role of the United States in it.
In these critical times an occasion which offers the prospect of America's leaders, State and national, working side by side to give the United States enlightened leadership warrants vigorous support. I am firmly convinced that this conference will produce a better understanding of the need which I feel for the full cooperation of each of you in dealing with the variety of problems which confront the nation.
I hope very much you will be able to join with me at ten o'clock on May fourth in Room 474 of the Executive Office Building, Pennsylvania and West Executive Avenues. I shall call upon my associates in the Executive Branch to lead subsequent discussions, but I do look forward to greeting you at the opening session, and I would very much like you to have luncheon with me at the White House at one o'clock on that day. After luncheon the discussions will resume that afternoon and the following morning until noon.
I trust you can be with us on these days.
Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER