Dwight D. Eisenhower
April 03, 1957

Remarks on Acceptance of the Golden Insignia From the Pan American Society of the United States.
I SCARCELY need to tell you that I am very proud, gentlemen, to receive this Golden Insignia from this distinguished Association.
I know that for 45 years you have been laboring to promote the understanding and cooperation between the American States. The success of the efforts that you have undertaken has been achieved in that great Organization of American States which-as you so rightly say--stands as not only a bulwark of freedom but as an example to all the rest of the world of our faith in the concepts of human dignity and freedom and independence of peoples.
So, in aligning myself with the things you are trying to do, I think of myself, really, as a private in the ranks. You people have been doing these things for a long time. I support it, I work for it, just as you do.
On April twenty-ninth there is to be a meeting, again, of the Representatives of the American Presidents in order to seek out ways in the economic field that we can further the common aspirations and study the common problems that fall to us as God-fearing nations, believing in the dignity of man and free government.
I believe that through such efforts as yours, particularly because of the standing your Organization has, we will make even better use of and make even stronger the Organization of American States.
So I assure you again that I am really very proud of your action in giving to me this Insignia. I shall treasure it always.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke in the Cabinet Room at the White House following the presentation to him of the Golden Insignia of the Pan American Society of the United States for his "distinguished contributions to inter-American solidarity." The presentation was made by Sprucille Braden, President of the Society.
The Insignia was adopted by the Society in 1925 as an award to outstanding citizens of the Western Hemisphere for their efforts in developing and conserving mutual knowledge, understanding, and true friendship among the American Republics and peoples.