Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 24, 1954

Memorandum of Disapproval of a Bill for the Relief of Nina Makeef, Also Known as Nina Berberova.
I AM WITHHOLDING my approval of H.R. 692, "For the relief of Nina Makeef, also known as Nina Berberova."
This alien entered the United States as a visitor and has not departed within the time permitted. She is now unlawfully in the United States. The bill would grant her the status of a lawful permanent resident upon payment of the required visa fee. The alien is a native of Russia, 53 years of age, who apparently is stateless. She entered the United States in November 1950. Prior to that entry she had been a long time resident of France. It appears that she can return to France.
Upon the alien's failure to depart when her period of lawful stay expired deportation proceedings were instituted. She was accorded a hearing and ordered deported. However, the Board of Immigration Appeals granted the alien the privilege of deporting voluntarily from the United States, and alternatively ordered that in the event she failed to depart the order of deportation should be reinstated. She has failed to depart.
This alien has been permitted to remain in the United States beyond the period of time authorized by law and she should be required to depart in accordance with the terms under which she was granted admission to this country. There are many other aliens in foreign countries who are awaiting an opportunity to come to the United States for permanent residence but who are required to follow the regular means of obtaining permanent resident status. There are no facts present in this case justifying the enactment of special legislation granting this alien preferential treatment over others seeking to enter the United States.
The enactment of this bill undoubtedly would encourage other aliens to attempt to enter the United States as visitors for a temporary period and thereafter seek exemption from requirements of the immigration laws through special legislation.
Accordingly, I am constrained to withhold my approval from the bill.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This memorandum was released at Lowry Air Force Base, Denver, Colo.