Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 26, 1960

Proclamation 3368—National Farm-City Week, 1960

Whereasthe science and practice of American agriculture is vital to the wellbeing of our people, to the strength of our Nation, and to the peace of the world; and
Whereasthe products of our farms and ranches are used by vast segments of our industry, business, and commerce; and
Whereasagriculture, industry, business, and commerce working together bring to each of us an abundant supply of food and fiber when, where, and in the forms we need them; and
Whereasit is important that there be continued mutual understanding among those who produce this bountiful supply of farm products, those who process and distribute them, and those who consume them:
Now, Therefore, I, Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the period from November 18 through November 24, 1980, as National Farm-City Week, and I call upon the people throughout the country to participate fully in the observance of that week.
I request the Department of Agriculture, the land-grant universities and colleges, the cooperative extension services. and all other appropriate agencies and officials of the Government to cooperate with National, State, and local farm organizations and other groups in preparing and carrying out programs for the appropriate observance of National Farm-City Week, including public meetings, discussions, exhibits, pageants, and press, radio, and television features, with special emphasis on the interdependence of producers, processors, distributors, and consumers of agricultural products.
I also request urban groups to join in this observance along with farm groups, as evidence of America's appreciation of all those on the farms and in the cities who provide us with our daily bread and other necessities of life.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this twenty-sixth day of August in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-fifth.


DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
By the President:

DOUGLAS DILLON,

Acting Secretary of State.