Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 27, 1959

Joint Statement Following Discussions With Chancellor Adenauer of Germany.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States visited the German Federal Capital on August 26 and 27, in order to confer with the German Federal Government. On the morning of August 27, President Eisenhower called on Federal President Heuss.
President Eisenhower and Chancellor Dr. Adenauer then had a private detailed discussion on world-wide political questions. Following this meeting, a larger meeting took place, including the President and the Chancellor and also the U.S. Secretary of State and the German Federal Minister of Foreign Affairs, as well as advisers of both governments. The discussions were conducted in the spirit of frankness and friendship characterizing the close ties between the two countries.
The President and the Chancellor discussed disarmament, the problems of Berlin and German reunification, European integration, and the continued cooperation of the two countries in the Atlantic Alliance. They reviewed in detail the results of the recent Geneva Conference. In this context Western policy in relation to the Soviet Union was discussed.
President Eisenhower and Chancellor Adenauer restated their belief that pacts of collective defense in accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter contribute to the maintenance of world peace. The mutual cooperation of both their countries within the Atlantic Alliance, which alliance is of utmost importance to world peace, will therefore continue to be one of the pillars of the foreign policies of the two countries.
The President and the Chancellor reaffirmed their resolve to continue their efforts to achieve a just and peaceful solution of the problem of the tragic division of Germany, a solution consistent with the desire of the German people and assuring peace and security in Europe. In this context President Eisenhower referred once again to the pledge given by the United States and its allies to protect the freedom and welfare of the people of Berlin.
Note: Because of the President's departure from Bonn immediately following the discussions, the White House release of this joint statement was made in London.