Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 31, 1958

Remarks Opening the United States Exhibit at the Second International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
[ Delivered over trans-Atlantic telephone from the U. S. Naval Base, Newport, R. I. ]
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It gives me real pleasure to participate in this trans-Atlantic opening of the United States Exhibit. This display is further tangible evidence of the determination of my country to advance the peaceful uses of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind.
At the first United Nations Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in 1955, we charted some of the paths along which we believed this new science would advance. I recall a visit to that Exhibition a few days before its formal opening, and I shared with you the hopes in the great promise which science offered and continues to offer. We have made great strides since the summer of 1955.
Now three years later, we will see here in graphic demonstration for scientists and laymen alike, examples of some of the ways in which the atom is already being made to serve humanity. A few weeks ago I was shown a scale model of our Exhibit, and I know that the demonstrations will be both impressive and informative.
Also, I find it gratifying that so many nations are joining in this Conference and Exhibition. A number of them will also have remarkable exhibits. I wish it were possible for me to see them all.
There should be a fruitful exchange of views on the new scientific advances. My country, which initiated the project of this scientific conference, will continue to share its resources and knowledge with other countries to the end that the fullest benefits of nuclear energy may be enjoyed by all.
Surely all nations, all technically-trained people, the United Nations organization itself, and all who participate in this Conference will continue to press forward to transform this great natural force from an instrument of destruction to a power for good in our own day and for our children to come after us.
I now formally open the United States Exhibit.
Note: The Conference was held in Geneva, Switzerland, September 1-13.