Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 25, 1959

Special Message to the Congress Urging Action on Debt Management Legislation.
To the Congress of the United States:
On June 8, I transmitted to Congress a message requesting legislation that would (1) remove the artificial limitation which the law now poses on the interest rate at which the Treasury is allowed to borrow money for more than five years, and (2) remove a similar limitation on the rate the Government can pay on Savings Bonds.
Last week, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives voted to suspend consideration of these proposals for the remainder of this session. This action was a grave disappointment to me.
The American people have a tremendous stake in this proposed legislation. Failure to enact it means that--
--millions of thrifty Americans cannot be fairly treated, since the Treasury will be unable to pay a fair rate of interest on Savings bonds;
--the cost of living may rise further, as the Treasury will be forced to manage our $290 billion debt in a way that adds to pressure on prices;
--responsible people at home and abroad can only conclude that we have not yet determined to manage our financial affairs as soundly as we should.
I would like to make two things absolutely clear:
First, the Administration is willing to assume full responsibility for managing the Federal Government's debt if it is allowed to do so free from artificial restrictions and on a parity with other borrowers.
Second, if the requested legislation is not enacted, those in the Congress who are unwilling to pass it must assume full responsibility for the possibly serious consequences.
This country's outstanding public debt of almost $290 billion is held by our citizens and financial institutions, and by foreign central banks and investors who have accumulated dollars as part of their reserves. Each investor has his own investment requirements. He buys different kinds of securities in order to meet those needs. Common to all investors, however, is the requirement that the rate of interest paid on the securities be fair and equitable in the light of other investment opportunities and, secondly, that the purchasing power of their invested dollars will not be impaired.
These considerations apply directly to the way in which the Government handles its debt. There can be no question as to the Government's obligation to deal fairly and justly with the millions of its citizens who invest a portion of their savings, sometimes as a patriotic duty, in Government bonds. And there should be no question as to our determination to manage our debt soundly and in the best interests of all of the people.
We have worked tirelessly for a balanced budget. We need this balance so that we can avoid the deficits that lead to higher prices, to a rising cost of living, and to an eating away of the value of the billions of dollars that thrifty and far-sighted Americans have saved. But Congressional inaction on our debt management proposal could do much to offset the progress we have made toward fiscal responsibility.
To manage the public debt in a sound manner the Treasury must be able to borrow money for long as well as short periods of time. A 1918 statute now prescribes, however, that we cannot pay more than 4 1/4 percent for long-term money. So long as the present prosperity contributes to a strong demand for credit, and thus keeps the cost of new long-term borrowing higher than 4 1/4 percent, we will not be able to borrow for periods longer than five years.
Let me suggest one simple parallel to show why the Treasury should be able to borrow for longer periods. Suppose that an individual had a mortgage on his home that had to be renewed every few months. He would be exposed to every shift in the economy and to every change in financial conditions. Yet, the Congress in effect is forcing the Treasury into this type of exposed position. It is saying to the Treasury, "When you have any borrowing to do, do it all on a short-term basis."
Within the next twelve months the Government must borrow $85 billion to cover maturing securities, redemptions, and seasonal cash needs. This Government, with its great financial resources, can normally carry a sizeable amount of short-term debt. But it cannot afford to rely exclusively on borrowing that must be continually renewed. Yet, if the Congress insists that we continue to finance wholly with short-term securities, the whole $290 billion debt will grow shorter and shorter. This will make it even harder to handle in the future.
The vital interests of all Americans are at stake because excessive reliance on short-term financing can have grave consequences for the purchasing power of the dollar. The issuance of a large amount of short-term Treasury debt would have an effect not greatly different from the issuance of new money. Because these securities are soon to be paid off, their holders can treat them much like ready cash. Moreover short-term securities are more likely to become lodged in commercial banks. When a commercial bank acquires a million dollars of Government securities, bank deposits rise by a million dollars. This is the same as a million dollar increase in the money supply. When the money supply builds up too rapidly relative to production, inflation is the result. The piling up of an excessive amount of short-term debt poses a serious threat that may generate both the fear and the fact of future inflation at an unforeseeable time.
Now, while the Nation is enjoying a period of rapid economic advancement, we want to keep the cost of living steady. And, if we act wisely, we should be able to do so. We must live within our means and we must exercise all the necessary precautions in the use of credit. We have made good progress toward preventing excessive Government spending. But we may fail in our efforts to keep prices from rising if we do not handle our debt in the proper way. This is why the Treasury must have the capacity to finance the Government's requirements in free credit markets without artificial restrictions.
The need for sound debt management stems not only from domestic considerations. Foreign investors have substantial holdings of our securities, as well as other claims on this Nation. With so large a financial stake in our economy, these foreign central banks and other foreign investors have a very practical interest in the manner in which we handle our affairs. It is essential that they, too, continue to view the American dollar as a strong and stable currency. In a free market economy, confidence is not the simple result of legislation. It is earned by adherence to sound practices.
Let me state as plainly as I can that this is not legislation to increase interest rates. This Administration is not in favor of high interest rates. We always seek to borrow as cheaply as we can without resorting to unsound practices. The Treasury already has the authority to borrow at any rates of interest on obligations up to five years. What we are seeking is the authority, already possessed by all other borrowers, to obtain funds for longer periods as well. To prohibit the Treasury from paying the market price for long-term money is just as impracticable as telling the Defense Department that it cannot pay the fair market price for a piece of equipment. The result would be the same in either case: the Government could not get what it needs.
The need for Congressional action with respect to the existing 3.26 percent interest rate ceiling on Savings Bonds is equally pressing. The Government occupies a dual trusteeship position with respect to the 40,000,000 Americans who own Savings Bonds and the 8,000,000 people who purchase them regularly. The average holder looks to the Government for a fair rate of return, reasonably competitive with other savings opportunities. The Treasury has announced that when the ceiling is removed, it will immediately raise the rate from 3.25 percent to 3.75 percent on all newly issued E and H Bonds, if held to maturity. Whenever legislation is enacted, this rate increase will be made retroactive to June 1, 1959. In addition, the future return to the investor on Savings Bonds purchased before June 1 and held to maturity would be increased by 1/2 of one percent. These actions would result in fair and equitable rates of return on Savings Bonds.
The second part of the trusteeship relationship of the Government with respect to holders of Savings Bonds involves the purchasing power of the dollars invested in the bonds. The Savings Bond holder expects the Government to try to insure that the future value of his savings will not be eaten away by progressive erosion of the dollar. To help assure that the value of the dollar will be protected, the whole debt management proposal should be enacted.
Each of these trusteeship considerations is vital; the thrifty American is entitled to both.
The issue with respect to our legislative proposals is whether we are going to demonstrate responsibility in the management of our Federal debt. Ours is the richest economy in the world. We have a large public debt, but we can certainly handle it soundly and efficiently if we remove the artificial obstacles to borrowing competitively in the free market. By adopting the Administration's proposals, the Congress would be demonstrating to people at home and abroad that we have the determination to preserve our financial integrity and to protect our currency.
No issue of greater importance has come before this session of Congress. In the best interests of the American people, I urge the Congress to enact the Administration's proposals at this session.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: For the President's message of June 8, see Item 126.