Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 03, 1955

Citation and Remarks at Presentation of the Medal of Freedom to Robert B. Anderson.
[ Text read by Commander Edward L. Beach, Naval Aide to the President ]
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD

OF THE MEDAL OF FREEDOM TO

ROBERT B. ANDERSON
To ROBERT B. ANDERSON, for exceptionally meritorious service in furtherance of the security of the United States.
As Secretary of the Navy Mr. Anderson rendered a brilliant performance in the administration of that service. As Deputy Secretary of Defense he continued to apply in superb fashion sound judgment and keen foresight in formulating and resolving programs of interest to this nation and its allies.
Through his work in international affairs--in particular, his service as Defense Member of the Operations Coordinating Board and his participation in meetings of the North Atlantic Council and in the development of the St. Lawrence Seaway program-he has contributed to the sound advancement of our national security.
In these activities and in many other ways Mr. Anderson has rendered great service to his country. It is my pleasure to award him the Medal of Freedom.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
[ Remarks of the President]
I must say that if you give these only to persons going away, I really am fairly disappointed to be giving you this. It has been a wonderful experience to have you here. I am sorry you are leaving us so early--next Friday, I believe--but we will look forward to your coming back sometime to the service of your country because the kind of performance you have rendered is one that we would like to see repeated often here.
Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden. Mr. Anderson replied:
"Thank you, sir.
"Mr. President, I would say that there has never been a more rewarding experience of my life, and I have never had a greater privilege nor a greater honor than to serve under your administration and to serve with Mr. Wilson. All I can say now is that I will always be obedient to any wishes that you may have, and God bless you in your work."
Mr. Anderson served as Secretary of the Navy from February 4, 1953, through May 3, 1954, and then as Deputy Secretary of Defense through August 4, 1955.