Dwight D. Eisenhower
August 15, 1960

Remarks Upon Inspection of the Capsule Retrieved from the Satellite Discoverer XIII.
I SHOULD LIKE to think of some way that I could properly commend the people who are responsible for this remarkable achievement. I know that mere medals and ribbons don't do this. But I do think that I can in a feeble way attempt to assure all of you that the American people are indeed proud of what you have done.
This is another incident in a remarkable series of accomplishments that show how rapidly America has forged far ahead into worthwhile exploration of space. This one has so much promise for future development of the same kind of achievement and possibly even, finally, having men to come back to tell us about it.
The great achievement of the sun satellite that for 22 million miles and 3 months continued to telemeter back to the United States and to the world--to the earth--information that never before had been achieved.
And finally another recent one, this one about the balloon--this big balloon. I just had a report this morning from scientific circles outside of Government which said that this was the greatest advance in the science of communications that had been achieved in many years.
So to have this remarkable achievement we have here today climax this long series must indeed give every American a great deal of pride and particularly those of you and all your associates that had a part in it.
Quite naturally, I am proud that someone thought of the thoughtful gesture, so far as I was personally concerned, of giving me this little flag that has certainly now for itself a unique history. I will try to see that it is put into a place where all Americans can see it and be reminded of this great accomplishment.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke in the Conference Room at the White House where the capsule was on exhibit.
Gen. Thomas D. White, Chief of Staff of the U.S. Air force, presented the President with a flag taken from the capsule, which was recovered from the Pacific Ocean on August 12. In presenting the flag General White noted that the capsule had been released from orbit in outer space in the vicinity of our 49th State, Alaska, and recovered in the vicinity the 50th State, Hawaii. Secretary of Defense Thomas S. Gates, Jr., also spoke at the ceremonies.
The remarks of General White and Secretary Gates were released with those of the President.