Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 21, 1959

Joint Statement Following the Western Summit Conference.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States of America, the President of the French Republic, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany met in Paris and at Rambouillet on the 19th, 20th and 21st of December 1959 and exchanged views on various subjects of common interest.
In the course of these meetings consideration was given to the views expressed by the member governments of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization at the meeting of the Council held in Paris from the 15th to the 17th of December.
Among the subjects discussed were East-West relations, disarmament and problems relating to Germany including Berlin. On the last point the Heads of State and Government reaffirmed the principles set forth in the Four Power communiqué of December 14th, 1958, and the Declaration of the North Atlantic Council of December 16th, 1958 on Berlin.
The Heads of State and Government agreed on the desirability of a Four Power conference with the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The purpose of this conference would be to consider a number of questions of mutual concern. President Eisenhower, General de Gaulle and Mr. Macmillan have sent letters to Mr. Khrushchev proposing such a meeting beginning on the 27th of April in Pads. These letters were delivered in Moscow this morning. The texts are being immediately released.
The Heads of State and Government have agreed on the procedures to be followed in preparation for the proposed meeting and have issued the necessary directives to this end.
The North Atlantic Council will be informed of the results of the present conversations at the Ministerial Meeting which will take place on the 22nd of December, and the Council will be regularly consulted during the course of the preparatory work.
The Heads of State and Government express the hope that the proposed conference will contribute to the strengthening of peace with justice.
Note: This joint statement was released in Paris.