Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 20, 1956

Remarks at the Pageant of Peace Ceremonies.
[ Delivered over radio and television at 5:15 p. m. ]
Mr. Chairman, Secretary Seaton, and My Friends:
In this Nation's capital city we are joined tonight with millions in all our forty-eight States, and, indeed, throughout the world, in the happiness and in the hope that Christmas brings.
Not that everyone is filled with happiness and hope in this season of rejoicing. Far from it. There is weariness--there is suffering for multitudes. There is hunger as well as happiness, slavery as well as freedom in the world tonight. But in the myriads of Christmas candles we see the vision of a better world for all people.
In the light of Christmas, the dark curtains of the world are drawn aside for the moment. We see more clearly our neighbors next door; and our neighbors in other nations. We see ourselves and the responsibilities that belong to us. Inspired by the story of Christmas we seek to give of our happiness and abundance to others less fortunate. Even now the American people, on the farm and in the city, rallying through the Red Cross and other voluntary agencies to meet the needs of our neighbors in Hungary, are true to the spirit of Christmas.
Even more important, there are particularly manifested during this season those spiritual qualities of freedom and honor and neighborliness and good will--great virtues that make all peoples one. Through them, and faith in them, we see how men can live together in peace; for one glorious moment we sense progress toward that aspiration of every religious faith--"Peace on earth, good will to men."
These are hallowed words; through ages they have heartened and moved mankind, even though their message of peace is far too often drowned by the strident voices of the fearful or the arrogant, who fill our minds with doubt and pessimism. They blur our vision with clouds of hate.
But the spirit of Christmas returns, yet again, to enable us to gain understanding of each other; to help each other; to obey the elemental precepts of justice; to practice good will toward all men of every tongue and color and creed; to remember that we are all identical in our aspirations for a peaceful, a decent, a rewarding life.
In the warm glow of the Christmas tree, it is easy to say these things, but when the trees come down and the lights are put away--as they always are--then we have a true testing of the spirit. That testing will be answered, throughout the year ahead, by the success each of us experiences in keeping alive the inspiration and exaltation of this moment.
We must proceed by faith, knowing the light of Christmas is eternal, though we cannot always see it.
We must believe that the truth of Christmas is constant; that men can live together in peace as Lincoln said, "with charity for all, with firmness in the right."
In this spirit, I now turn on the lights of the National Christmas Tree. [The lights are turned on]
By the light of Christmas charity and Christmas truth, we enter the New Year with gratitude and strength. In this spirit, let us make sure that 1957 will add a memorable chapter to the story of mankind.
Now, on behalf of Mrs. Eisenhower and myself, may I wish for all of you in this audience--throughout our nation--through. out the world--a truly Merry Christmas. And may the Father of us all bless all who dwell upon the earth.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke just before lighting the National Community Christmas Tree at the Pageant of Peace Ceremonies on the Ellipse. His opening words "Mr. Chairman" referred to Edward R. Carr, President and General Chairman of the Pageant of Peace.