Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 23, 1958

Remarks at the Pageant of Peace Ceremonies.
[ Delivered over radio and television at 5 p. m. ]
My fellow Americans:
Tonight I would like to speak not only to you, but for you, to the peoples of the world.

This is the time of year when Christians celebrate the birth of the founder of their faith. It is also the time when all peoples, regardless of religious belief, look forward with hope to the coming of another year. It is quite appropriate, therefore, to speak tonight of Christmas and of the New Year, for both can bring a new anticipation of a better, a more peaceful, world to the hearts and minds of men and women everywhere, of all creeds, of all ideologies, of all nations.
The Christmas Message of "Peace on Earth, Good Will Toward Men" is not alone an ideal of Christianity. It is a basic aspiration of Christian, Jew, Moslem, Hindu, Buddhist alike--of every person in the world who has faith in an Almighty God.
It is not limited to us as Americans or even to people of the free world. It is matched in yearning in the innermost thoughts of all peoples. It is a universal, divine spark that lights the soul of mankind.
As we near Christmas and the New Year I again give my solemn word on behalf of the American people to all the peoples of the world: that the people of the United States and their Government do not want war. They want to work steadfastly to make "Peace on Earth, Good Will Toward Men" a reality for all humankind.
The people of the United States do not wish to enslave or control any other nation or any other people. They seek only to enjoy with their fellowmen peace--a peace of honor and justice. They respect the rights of all people to do the same.
The United States is strong, and will remain strong, because that is the only way in today's world that the peace can be protected--but the United States will never use its strength to break the peace.
Though the United States will never retreat in the face of force, or the threat of force, it will always welcome and accept serious and honest proposals to negotiate international differences.
The United States has pledged its national honor to work for peace. for us, this pledge is no less than a sacred obligation. It is freely, but not lightly, given to the nations of the world.
As I press this button and the darkness surrounding the National Christmas Tree is illuminated by light, I hope that this ceremony has greater significance to all Americans and to the world than just the fighting of a tree. I pray that the darkness, which at times has encompassed the world, may be illuminated by the light of understanding and cooperation of all the nations that earnestly seek peace in the year ahead.
To the men, women and children of America and to all peoples throughout the world--A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.

Good night, and Peace be with you !
Note: The President spoke just before lighting the National Community Christmas Tree at the Pageant of Peace Ceremonies on the Ellipse.