Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 10, 1956

Statement by the President: Human Rights Day in the Light of Recent Events in Hungary.
TODAY, DECEMBER 10th, the United States together with many other nations will observe Human Rights Day. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights overwhelmingly approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations eight years ago has rightly been hailed as an important milestone along the road that leads to worldwide recognition of the inherent dignity of man.
This year the free world has the most compelling reasons for observing Human Rights Day with renewed awareness and resolution, but it has little cause to "celebrate" that day.
The recent outbreak of brutality in Hungary has moved free peoples everywhere to reactions of horror and revulsion. Our hearts are filled with sorrow. Our deepest sympathy goes out to the courageous, liberty-loving people of Hungary.
The terror imposed upon Hungary repudiates and negates almost every article in the Declaration of Human Rights.
It denies that men are born free and equal in dignity and rights, and that all should act in the spirit of brotherhood.
It denies the right to life, liberty, and security of person.
It denies the principle that no one shall be subjected to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.
It denies that no person shall be arbitrarily arrested, detained, or exiled.
It denies that all are equal before the law and entitled to its equal protection.
It denies the right to fair and public hearings by an independent and impartial tribunal.
It denies the right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion.
It denies the right to freedom of opinion and expression.
It denies the right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
It denies that the individual may not be held in slavery or servitude.
It denies that the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government.
That these human rights have been so flagrantly repudiated is cause for worldwide mourning.
But the human spirit knows, as Thomas Jefferson said, that the God Who gave us life, gave us liberty at the same time. The courage and sacrifices of the brave Hungarian people have consecrated that spirit anew.
Not only government but the people of many nations have reacted in spontaneous sympathy. I am proud of the generous response of our voluntary agencies, humanitarian organizations, and of State and local governments but I am especially proud of what so many of our people have done, and are doing, as individuals.
We shall continue to offer shelter to the homeless, as we shall go on feeding the hungry and providing medicine and care for the sick.
On this Human Rights Day, it is for each of us to recognize anew that we are brothers in our Father's house, and each is truly his brother's keeper. We cannot shed that responsibility, nor do we want to do so. Let us resolve on this day that the world shall never forget what tyranny has done to our fellow man in Hungary.
Each in his own way, let us do all that we can to reaffirm, in word and in deed, our faith in the cause of freedom everywhere in the world.
So doing, these honored dead "shall not have died in vain."
Note: This statement was released at Augusta, Ca.