Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 26, 1953

Statement by the President on Reducing American Forces in Korea.
THE FIGHTING in Korea was ended by an armistice which has now been in effect for five months. We do not need as much ground strength there now as when there was fighting. That is the more true because of the capabilities of ROK forces which were substantially built up during the war. Also our growing national air power possesses greater mobility and greater striking force than ever before.
Accordingly, I have directed that the United States ground forces in Korea be progressively reduced as circumstances warrant. As an initial step, two Army Divisions will soon be withdrawn and returned to the United States.
While the United States is acting in good faith to preserve the armistice and accomplish its purposes, we remain alert to all possibilities. Therefore, I emphasize that the action being taken does not impair our readiness and capacity to react in a way which should deter aggression and, if aggression should nevertheless occur, to oppose it with even greater effect than heretofore.
Recently the United Nations members which had forces in Korea clearly stated that, together, we would be united and prompt to resist any renewal of armed attack. The same statement pointed out that "the consequences of such a breach of the armistice would be so grave, that, in all probability, it would not be possible to confine hostilities within the frontiers of Korea."
United States military forces in the Far East will be maintained at appropriate levels to take account of the foregoing and to fulfill the commitments which the United States has undertaken in that area, and which are vital to the security of the United States. These forces will feature highly mobile Naval, Air, and Amphibious units.
Thus, we move forward in pursuance of our broad policy to make evident to all the world that we ourselves have no aggressive intentions and that we are resourceful and vigilant to find ways to reduce the burdens of armament and to promote a climate of peace.
Note: In his statement, the President quoted from the Special Report of the Unified Command on the Armistice in Korea. This report was submitted to the Secretary General of the United Nations on August 7 and is published in the Department of State Bulletin (vol. 29, p. 246).
The President's statement was released at Augusta, Ga.