Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 09, 1959

Joint Statement Following Discussions With King Mohammad Zahir.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States, Honorable Dwight D. Eisenhower, has just paid a visit to Afghanistan, where he met with His Majesty Mohammad Zahir, King of Afghanistan, and other members of the royal family and members of the Afghan Government.
President Eisenhower was accompanied by Ambassador Robert Murphy, Major and Mrs. John Eisenhower and members of the Presidential staff.
President Eisenhower conveyed the warm and friendly greetings of the people of the United States to the people of Afghanistan and expressed his deep appreciation for the reception accorded him and his party.
While the President's visit was primarily an expression of goodwill, talks on questions of mutual interest were carried on. These talks were held in an atmosphere of cordiality.
His Majesty, Mohammad Zahir, King of Afghanistan, explained Afghanistan's policy of independence and neutrality.
Both sides agreed to work unstintingly and patiently toward the limitation of international frictions and tensions.
Note was taken of the strides that Afghanistan is making in economic development and social progress. President Eisenhower gave assurances of an American desire to continue to assist Afghanistan in its task of strengthening its economic and social structure.
Both sides also agreed that in the present day it is imperative that international disputes are settled by peaceful means and further concurred in the need for world peace, especially so as to enable the energies of mankind to be channeled into constructive pursuits of development and human fulfillment.
They endorsed unqualifiedly the principles of the United Nations Charter as standards for international behavior.
His Majesty Mohammad Zahir Shah, King of Afghanistan, expressed high hopes for concrete results from the prospective summit meeting of President Eisenhower with other heads of government and from his forthcoming visit to the Soviet Union.
Both sides further expressed hopes that a workable and enforceable basis for disarmament can soon be found.
Both sides agreed that the visit of President Eisenhower to Afghanistan had strengthened the already warm and friendly relations between the two countries.
Note: This joint statement was released in Kabul.