Dwight D. Eisenhower
December 10, 1953

Executive Order 10507—Further Amendment of Executive Order No. 9805, Prescribing Regulations Governing Payment of Certain Travel and Transportation Expenses
By virtue of authority vested in me by the act of August 2, 1946, 60 Stat. 806, as amended, it is ordered that Executive Order No. 9805 of November 25, 1946, entitled "Regulations Governing Payment of Travel and Transportation Expenses of Civilian Officers and Employees of the United States when Transferred from One Official Station to Another for Permanent Duty," as amended by Executive Orders No. 9933 of February 27, 1948, No. 10196 of December 20, 1950, and No. 10274 of July 18, 1951, be, and it is hereby, further amended as follows:
Section 1. Section 12 of the said Executive Order No. 9805, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
"SEC 12. (a) Commutation of expenses—general. In lieu of the payment of actual expenses of transportation, packing, crating, drayage, and unpacking of household goods and personal effects in the case of transfers between points within the continental United States, reimbursement shall be made to the employee on a commuted basis at rates per hundred pounds as fixed by zones in Schedule A which is attached to and made a part of these regulations. The amount payable shall be the product of the applicable rate and the net weight of household goods and personal effects actually transported (within the weight limitation prescribed by section 16 hereof). In case the weight of the household goods transported is less than the one-thousand pound minimum weight allowance chargeable under applicable tariffs, the employee may be reimbursed to the extent of the minimum tariff requirement. Government bills of lading shall not be used.
(b) Commutation of expenses—temporary storage. In lieu of the payment of actual expenses of temporary storage of household goods and personal effects in the case of transfers between points within the continental United States and in addition to allowances under Schedule A, reimbursement shall not exceed the amount actually paid by the employee for the storage in question. Any claim for reimbursement for temporary storage shall be supported by the original or certified copy of the receipted warehouse bill.
SEC. 2. Schedule A attached to and forming a part of the said Executive Order No. 9805, as last amended by the said Executive Order No. 10274, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

Note: The tariffs approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission include minimum weight provisions to insure that, in Instances where the charges computed in one bracket exceed those computed for the same mileage in the next higher bracket, the lower rate is used. The breakpoint columns in Schedule A are designed as a convenience in determining the proper amount of reimbursement in such Instances.
1The rate applicable for the transportation of 1,999 pounds, net, or less for the applicable mileage, column (a), is that shown in column (b) unless the net weight exceeds the number of pounds shown in column (c) for the applicable mileage; in the latter case the applicable rate is that shown in column (d) for the same mileage and the applicable weight is the minimum hundredweight of that column Instead of the actual weight of the goods transported.
2In the case of transportation of household goods weighing 2,000 to 3,999, net, the amount of reimbursement is computed by using columns (d), (e), and (f) in the same manner as described above for columns (b), (c), and (d).
3In the case of transportation of household goods weighing 4,000 to 7,000 pounds, net, the amount of reimbursement Is the product of the applicable rate In column (f) for the applicable mileage multiplied by the number of hundredweight transported.
To illustrate: The amount of reimbursement for the transportation of 1,800 pounds, net, for 100 miles is computed by using the applicable rate in column (d), $4.69 (since 1,800 pounds exceeds the applicable column (c) weight, 1,735 pounds) and the minimum hundredweight of column (d), 20. The amount so computed is $93.80. The amount of reimbursement for the transportation of 1,700 pounds, net, a distance of 100 miles is the product of the applicable rate In column (b), $3.41 (since 1,700 pounds does not exceed the applicable weight in column (c), 1,735 pounds) multiplied by the net hundredweight transported, 17. The amount so computed is $91.97.
Additional Allowances
Island Shipments.To the amount of reimbursement computed from the foregoing table add (a) $3.50 per hundred pounds for each shipment by common carrier having Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, as its origin or destination, or (b) $5.00 per hundred pounds for each shipment by common carrier having its origin or destination on any other island of one of the coastal States that can be reached by motor carrier transportation only by use of ferry or ship.
Metropolitan Areas.To the amount of reimbursement computed from the foregoing table add (a) 30 cents per hundred pounds for each shipment by common carrier originating or terminating, or both, in one of the areas described below, or (b) add 60 cents per hundred pounds for each shipment' by common carrier originating in one of the areas described below and terminating in another of such areas:
Illinois: Chicago, and Cook and Lake Counties and any point within the territory bounded by Lake Michigan and Indiana State Line on the east, U. S. Highway 30 on the south, State Highway 31 on the west, and State Highway 120 on the north, Including corporate limits of points and places on the specified highways.
Indiana: Gary, and any point in Lake County.
New York: New York City, and any point in Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester Counties.
Ohio: Cleveland, and any point in Cuyahoga County.
Pennsylvania : Philadelphia, and any point in Delaware, Montgomery, and Philadelphia Counties. Pittsburgh, and any point in Allegheny County.
This order shall be effective in any case in which the transportation Involved is authorized and commenced on or after May 8, 1953.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
December 10, 1953.