Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 29, 1960

Remarks at the Airport in San Carlos de Bariloche Upon Leaving for Chile.
President Frondizi, Mayor Sacido, and all citizens of Argentina:
I think there is some significance in the circumstance that gives me the privilege of saying my farewell to Argentina, here in the shadow of the majestic Andes. Possibly these eternal mountains might symbolize for all of us the strength, spiritual power, and unity of all the Americas.
How simple our world would be if in the management of human affairs all of us could be as sturdy and inspiring as are these evidences of God's creation.
We too must be sturdy, must be firm and unshakable, in our adherence to basic principles to which we have commonly subscribed. We of the Americas are pledged to nonintervention in the internal affairs of our sister Republics, and we adhere to a policy of mutual respect and juridical equality of States. We recognize our economic, social, and cultural interdependence, and strive to be helpful to one another.
So, in leaving you, I repeat that we of the United States recognize the mutual dependence of the nations of this hemisphere. We attach the highest possible importance to maintaining a friendly, unswerving partnership with you and the other Republics.
Above all, we support the right of self-determination and human dignity. We will oppose with all our strength any outside attempt to enslave or regiment the peoples of any of us.
From my visit here, I know you share these thoughts.
I carry with me deep impressions of the vastness and natural wealth of your land. How fortunate you are, in a world of growing population and terrible under-consumption, to have in your possession resources which could if necessary support ten times as many persons as now live here--how lucky the world is that there is an Argentina with such a potential.
I salute with profound respect the gallant efforts you are making to create the firm foundation on which generations of steady progress may be built.
And I shall never forget your warm hospitality. In a few days with you I have met a great many people, and my heart has been warmed both by your understanding and by the many evidences of sincere friendship.
I trust that my visit has contributed a little to your understanding of my country, as I have learned much about yours, for again I say: without genuine understanding there simply cannot be cooperative progress.
Thank you, President Frondizi, thank you all--and hasta luego!
Note: The President spoke at approximately 10:15 a.m.