Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 29, 1960

Statement by the President Concerning the Recipients of the President's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service
THE DISTINGUISHED service of these men in the fields of administration, accountancy, science, and medicine contribute much to the general welfare of our country and to the progress of our world in justice and freedom. Their achievements provide an inspiring example for all Government employees, each of whom must perform at peak levels of productive effort if we are to solve successfully the complex problems of our times.
I welcome this opportunity of giving wider attention to their work.
Among America's most cherished traditions are those which guarantee full opportunity for the development of the individual citizen and which reward the exercise of high ability, resourcefulness, and unfailing energy. The careers of these five individuals witness to the living vitality of these traditions.
Note: The President's words were released in Washington as part of an announcement concerning the awards "for exceptionally meritorious civilian service." The recipients selected by the President were: Andrew Barr, Chief Accountant, Securities and Exchange Commission, for "exceptional contributions to the development of accounting principles and meaningful accounting presentations of corporate financial affairs to investors [which] have materially aided the process of capital formation in the United States and advanced the cause of investor protection"; Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, for "scientific and administrative leadership in planning and organizing American space exploration"; William J. Hopkins, Executive Clerk, White House Office, for "effective and impartial administration of the White House Office and his handling of the President's communications with the Congress" and "unselfish loyalty and high dedication to the service of the Presidency for three decades"; Dr. Winfred Overholser, Superintendent, St. Elizabeths Hospital, for "profound and far-reaching contributions in the field of mental health"; and Robert M. Page, Director of Research, Naval Research Laboratory, for "remarkable achievements in the field of electronics research, most particularly in the original development of radar."
Gold medals were presented by the President in a White House ceremony on March 7 at 11:30 a.m.