Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 15, 1956

Executive Order 10660—Providing for the Establishment of a National Defense Executive Reserve
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the United States, including sections 703 (a) and 710 (e) of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2153 (a); 2160 (e)), and as President of the United States, it is hereby ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. There is hereby established in the executive branch of the Government a National Defense Executive Reserve to be composed of persons selected from various segments of the civilian economy and from government to be trained for employment in executive positions in the Federal Government during periods of emergency.
SEC. 2. The Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization is hereby directed to institute and administer the Executive Reserve program; to coordinate the activities of other agencies in establishing units of the Reserve; to provide for appropriate standards of recruitment and training; and to issue necessary rules and regulations in connection with such program.
SEC. 3. The Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization in carrying out his responsibilities under this order may utilize the services of other departments and agencies in the maintenance of agency and centralized rosters and in the development of training programs and materials.
SEC. 4. Heads of departments and agencies of the Government designated by the Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization, after appropriate consultation, are authorized to establish units of the Executive Reserve and to select and designate persons to serve as members of the units.
SEC. 5. Activities of persons by reason of designation as Executive Reservists under this order shall not include acting or advising on any matter pending before any department or agency but shall be limited to receiving training for mobilization assignments under the Reserve program. With respect to activities as so limited, reservists who are not full-time Government employees shall be exempt from the operation of sections 281, 283, 284, 434, and 1914 of Title 18, United States Code, and section 190 of the Revised Statutes (5 U.S.C. 99).
SEC. 6. The Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization shall report to the President annually, and at such other times as may be appropriate, on the progress made in the development and operation of the Executive Reserve program.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
February 15, 1956.