Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 27, 1959

Remarks at the Dedication of a Statue of Simon Bolivar Presented by Venezuela.
Dr. Uslar Pietri, Mr. Secretary, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Friends:
It is indeed a great honor to join with you in the dedication of this impressive statue to the memory of Simon Bolivar. He was the hero of more than two hundred battles for the emancipation of man from foreign bondage and for the democratic way of life.
In times of crises and hardship, every nation produces its heroes, its leaders. Many are good. Few are great. But on occasion a leader emerges whose goodness and whose greatness reach far beyond his own country and beyond his own time. Simon Bolivar was one of these. He belongs to your nation, surely. But the world claims him, too, as one of the true benefactors of mankind.
Liberator of half a continent, prophet and precursor of Pan American union, Simon Bolivar will long be remembered for his enduring contribution in the struggle for unity and independence in the New World.
He represents one of history's most brilliant personifications of adventure, tragedy, and glory.
The Venezuelan people have steadfastly maintained their faith in the ultimate realization of Bolivar's democratic ideals. It is therefore fitting that this ceremony should follow closely upon the inauguration of President Betancourt, chosen by his countrymen in an election so conducted as to typify the true meaning of democracy.
I cannot think of a more appropriate tribute to the Great Liberator and the principles for which he fought than this further evidence, as President Betancourt has aptly described it, of the aptitude and capacity of the Venezuelan people to exercise their democratic prerogatives. The realization of Bolivar's dream in Venezuela through the determined efforts of his people is of the greatest importance in furthering the democratic aspirations of the American peoples throughout the hemisphere.
This dedication, then, will symbolize our mutual will to live and work together, in ever-increasing understanding, for the common prosperity of our two nations.

Thank you very much.
Note: The statue was presented to the Government of the United States by the Government of Venezuela. The dedication ceremony was held at the Simon Bolivar Plaza, Virginia Avenue and 18th Street NW., Washington, D.C. The President's opening words "Dr. Uslar Pietri, Mr. Secretary" referred to Dr. Arturo Uslar Pietri, Personal Representative of the President of Venezuela and head of the Venezuelan delegation to the dedication, and Christian A. Herter, Acting Secretary of State.