Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 16, 1960

Special Message to the Congress on the Mutual Security Program.
To the Congress of the United States:
A year ago in my message to the Congress on the Mutual Security Program, I described it as both essential to our security and important to our prosperity. Pointing out that our expenditures for Mutual Security are fully as important to our National Defense as expenditures for our own forces, I stated that the Mutual Security Program is not only grounded in our deepest self-interest but springs from the idealism of the American people which is the true foundation of our greatness. It rests upon five fundamental propositions:
(1) That peace is a matter of vital concern to all mankind;
(2) That to keep the peace, the free world must remain defensively strong;
(3) That the achievement of a peace which is just depends upon promoting a rate of world economic progress, particularly among the peoples of the less developed nations, which will inspire hope for fulfillment of their aspirations;
(4) That the maintenance of the defensive strength of the free world, and help to the less developed, but determined and hard working, nations to achieve a reasonable rate of economic growth are a common responsibility of the free world community;
(5) That the United States cannot shirk its responsibility to cooperate with all other free nations in this regard.
It is my firm conviction that there are only a few in the United States who would deny the validity of these propositions. The overwhelming support of the vast majority of our citizens leads us inexorably to mutual security as a fixed national policy.
The Mutual Security Program is a program essential to peace. The accomplishments of the Mutual Security Program in helping to meet the many challenges in the mid-20th Century place it among the foremost of the great programs of American history. Without them the map of the world would be vastly different today. The Mutual Security Program and its predecessors have been an indispensable contributor to the present fact that Greece, Turkey, Iran, Laos, Vietnam, Korea and Taiwan, and many nations of Western Europe, to mention only part, remain the home of free men.
While over the past year the Soviet Union has expressed an interest in measures to reduce the common peril of war, and while its recent deportment and pronouncement suggest the possible opening of a somewhat less strained period in our relationships, the menace of Communist imperialism nevertheless still remains. The military power of the Soviet Union continues to grow. Increasingly important to free world interests is the rate of growth of both military and economic power in Communist China. Evidence that this enormous power bloc remains dedicated to the extension of Communist control over all peoples everywhere is found in Tibet, the Taiwan Straits, in Laos and along the Indian border.
In the face of this ever-present Communist threat, we must, in our own interest as well as that of the other members of the free world community, continue our program of military assistance through the various mutual security arrangements we have established. Under these arrangements each nation has responsibilities, commensurate with its capabilities, to participate in the development and maintenance of defensive strength. There is also increasing ability of other free world nations to. share the burden of this common defense.
Obviously, no one nation alone could bear the cost of defending all the free world. Likewise, it would be impossible for many free nations long to survive if forced to act separately and alone. The crumbling of the weaker ones would obviously and increasingly multiply the threats to those remaining free, even the very strongest.
Collective security is not only sensible--it is essential.
That just peace which has always been and which remains our primary and common goal can never be obtained through weakness. The best assurance against attack is still the possession and maintenance of free world strength to deter attack.
The nations of Europe are increasingly assuming their share of the common defense task. None of our NATO partners other than Greece, Turkey, and Iceland now requires nor receives any economic assistance. Indeed, in rising volume, these nations are now providing economic assistance to others. Our NATO allies are also meeting their military needs to an increasing degree; several major countries now require no help. Our military programs in NATO countries today are largely designed and executed as joint cost sharing arrangements whereby vital additional defense needs are met through mutual effort.
It is clear that while every possibility to achieve trustworthy agreements which would reduce the peril of war must be explored, it would be most foolish to abandon or to weaken our posture of common deterrent strength which is so essential a prerequisite to the exploration of such possibilities. The need is for steadfast, undramatic, and patient persistence in our efforts to maintain our mutual defenses while working to find solutions for the problems which divide the World and threaten the peace.
The Mutual Security Program is a program essential to world progress in freedom. In addition to its mutual defense aspects, it also is the American part of a cooperative effort on the part of free men to raise the standards of living of millions of human beings from bases which are intolerably low, bases incompatible with human dignity and freedom.
Hundreds of millions of people throughout the world have learned that it is not ordained that they must live in perpetual poverty and illness, on the ragged edge of starvation. Their political leaders press the point home. In a variety of ways this drive is moving forward by fits and starts, often uncertain of its direction. It is sometimes involved in free world struggle against Communism, sometimes not. It is clearly in the interests of the United States that we assist this movement so that these countries may take their places as free, independent, progressing and stable members of the community of nations. It is equally clear that it would be against our interests if this forward movement were stifled or hindered. The result would be to breed frustration and explosive threats to political and economic stability in areas around the world.
Equally with military security, economic development is a common necessity and a common responsibility. An investment in the development of one part of the free world is an investment in the development of it all. Our welfare, and the welfare of all free men, cannot be divided-we are dependent one on the other. It is for each of us, the strong and the weak, the developed and the less developed, to join in the great effort to bring forth for all men the opportunity for a rewarding existence in freedom and in peace. World economic expansion and increase in trade will bring about increased prosperity for each free world nation.
New challenges, with corresponding opportunities, are now visible before us: the acceleration of the achievement of independence of peoples in Africa; the growing restlessness in the less developed areas; and the increasing potential for partnership and assistance to these areas as a result of the continued growth of the now healthy economies of the industrialized Western European nations and of Japan, Canada and Australia.
Free World cooperation is becoming the watchword of this effort. In the past year the capital of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development was doubled and that of the International Monetary Fund was increased by half. In addition, a United States proposal for an International Development Association to be affiliated with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development has been accepted in principle and a draft charter recently has been submitted to member governments. I expect to transit to the Congress recommendations on this matter in the near future. The industrialized nations of Europe, together with Japan and Canada, are notably stepping up their participation in cooperative efforts among themselves and with the less developed countries to promote growth. Similar approaches will be discussed at a meeting of representatives of a number of nations, to be held in Washington in March.
In our own Western Hemisphere society of nations, we are now joined in a great new venture, the Inter-American Development Bank. This new institution, formed in partnership with our neighboring nations, should prove of immense value in promoting the more rapid development of the member nations. Our participation in this joint effort is significant of the special interest which we have in the progressive development of our neighbors. Together with the very considerable dimensions of private and government investment taking place in the hemisphere, and the mutually beneficial technical cooperation we have so long enjoyed with our neighbors, it should serve to accelerate progress.
Thus the military and economic resources which we provide through the Mutual Security Program to help create and maintain positions of strength are properly to be regarded as what they are--investments in the common defense and welfare and thus in our own security and welfare. This is a Mutual Security Program.
Our concepts are sound, our policies of proven value, and our will to meet our responsibilities undiminished and constant.
THE PROPOSALS FOR FISCAL YEAR 1961
The form and general structure of the Mutual Security Program for fiscal year 1961 remains essentially that which has stood the test of experience. In the administration of the various mutual security programs, changes have been instituted in organization, programming, and management controls. It was in part for the purpose of analyzing and making recommendations for improving the administration of the program that I appointed last year a distinguished group of citizens headed by General Draper. Many of the recommendations that they made have already been put into effect. We are constantly seeking additional management improvements to meet the program needs and difficult problems of operating these diverse programs on a world-wide basis. The categories of activity are the same as those with which the Congress is familiar. Adjustments in the nature and dimension of activity are proposed which reflect and are responsible to the changes in the world scene, in the degrees of need and of capability for self-help. These adjustments also are consistent with an analysis of future needs and of future changes and capability for self-help. This forward analysis was, in part, conducted in conformance with the requirement of law that plans of future grant economic assistance be developed and presented to the Congress. The detailed plans and conclusions on future assistance will be submitted to the Congress in the near future.
MILITARY ASSISTANCE
For Military Assistance I am requesting in the pending Department of Defense budget an appropriation of $2 billion. This is more than was requested, or than was provided for fiscal year 1960. The request for a larger appropriation is not made in order to increase the proportionate share of United States participation in the common defense. Nor does it reflect an intent to embark on a vast expansion of the military assistance program.
The amount requested for military assistance within the Defense budget is in my considered judgment, and in that of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a need for our defense equally compelling and of equal importance with the needs of our own services provided for elsewhere in the Defense budget.
The amount requested is the result of careful and detailed review of the needs of our allies to enable them to maintain the level of combat effectiveness made possible by previous military assistance and to provide, mostly on a cost sharing basis, for certain essential force improvement projects. Without adequate provision for maintenance, the monies previously spent would be largely wasted. And without force improvement, without the provision of more advanced weapons, the free world forces would inevitably fall behind in their ability to counter modernized aggressor forces.
The fact, if it is a fact, of reductions in Soviet military manpower, does not alter the need for the maintenance of our collective defense. Soviet military power, as Mr. Khrushchev's own statements make clear, remains great. Our plans have never attempted to match Soviet armed manpower; they have been and are designed to deter aggression. Of special importance is the maintenance of a strong and effective deterrent posture in the NATO alliance. As indicated earlier, the improving economic position of Western Europe as a whole makes it possible for Europe to share increasingly in the cost of the common defense, and for certain major European countries to maintain their defense efforts without United States assistance. At the same time, the requirements for modernization and improvement are of such dimension that our participation in joint cost sharing projects with certain European countries over the immediate future is still essential. Provision for such contributions is included in the proposed program.
The amount requested for fiscal 1961 is consistent with the recommendations of the bipartisan committee of distinguished citizens headed by General Draper, which I appointed last year to review our policies and programs. This committee strongly urged the maintenance of a delivery program of approximately $2 billion annually. In recent years, annual deliveries have averaged about $2.2 billion. Deliveries in FY 1960, however, reflecting the reduced appropriations of recent years, will fall back to $1.8 billion or less. Unexpended balances carried over from previous years have now been reduced to a minimum and deliveries in future years will closely approximate the annual appropriation level.
In my considered judgment, an appropriation of $2 billion for FY 1961 is the minimum amount consistent with the maintenance of a firm and adequate collective defense posture. Anything less in effect precludes essential modernization and improvement of forces and limits us to a bare maintenance program.
ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
DEFENSE SUPPORT
For twelve of the nations with whom we are joined in collective or mutual security arrangements, we have for some years been contributing not only military resources required in the common defense but economic resources in the measure needed to permit the maintenance of such defenses without incurring political or economic instability. This category of resource contribution we term Defense Support--economic resources to assure a defense posture. These 12 countries maintain forces of over 3,000,000 men, more than the total number in the United States Armed Forces, and each of these underdeveloped countries, except for Spain, is part of the exposed land and off-shore island belt that forms the immediate southern and eastern boundary of the Sino-Soviet empire. Requirements in this Defense Support category have decreased somewhat; for fiscal year 1961 I am requesting for these programs $724 million or $111 million less than I asked for last year. This reduced requirement reflects in some measure a gradual but perceptible improvement in the economic situations in these countries. More than half, 56 per cent, is for the three Far Eastern countries of Korea, Taiwan and Vietnam which have the common characteristics that they are divided countries facing superior Communist forces on their borders, forces which the Communists previously have demonstrated their willingness to use, thereby compelling these frontier nations to support armed forces far in excess of their unaided capacities to maintain. The amounts requested for these purposes represent the least we can contribute and retain confidence that adequate defenses will be maintained.
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE
Another category of international cooperation in the Mutual Security Program is the provision of economic resources to other nations where such resources are essential to the maintenance of their freedom and stability. This category of cooperation we term Special Assistance. I am requesting $268 million for these purposes in fiscal year 1961. Such provisions will enable us, for example, to continue aid to the young nations of Morocco, Libya and Tunisia, to strengthen the stability of Jordan and the Middle East, to combat the encroachment of Communist influence in Afghanistan, and to undergird the economies in Bolivia and Haiti. Special Assistance will also enable our continued participation in such vital programs as the world-wide anti-malaria campaign.
AID TO DEVELOPMENT
The achievement of economic progress, of growth, depends on many things. Through collective security arrangements, through defensive measures, by giving military aid and defense support, we and other nations can achieve a measure of security and stability within which the process of development is possible and can be fostered. The primary and essential prerequisite internally is the determination to progress and take the actions needed and to make the sacrifices required. No matter how great the determination, however, there will remain tremendous needs for both technical improvement and capacity and for development capital. If a pace of development is to be achieved which will meet the essential demands of these peoples, outside help is a necessity.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION
Through our long established program of Technical Cooperation and by our contributions to the United Nations activities in the technical assistance field, we make a major contribution toward the satisfaction of this thirst and need for growth in knowledge and technical capacity. The Mutual Security Program proposed for Fiscal Year 1961 continues these vital activities and provides for the enlargement and extension of our technical assistance programs in the newly emerging nations of Africa. For bilateral technical assistance I request $172.5 million; for our participation in United Nations technical assistance programs I ask $33.5 million; and to supplement our much larger bilateral program with our neighbors to the south, I ask $1.5 million for the program of technical assistance which we conduct in cooperation with them through the Organization of American States.
AFRICA
Of inescapable interest to the United States in the world today is the increasing assumption of self-government by the peoples of the great Continent of Africa, especially in the area South of the Sahara. This vast area deserves and commands the full attention and assistance of the free world if it is to develop its institutions and its economy under freedom. While the needs of Africa South of the Sahara for development capital are real and can be expected to grow, there is an imperative and immediate requirement for increased education and training. The request for appropriations for Special Assistance includes an amount of $20 million for a special program to be instituted for the improvement of education and training in Africa South of the Sahara, with particular emphasis to be given to the meeting of needs which are common to all the countries of the area. It is my belief that this initial effort must grow significantly in the immediate years ahead and complement similar efforts on the part of other Free World nations so that the capacity of the new and other developing nations in Africa to manage and direct their development can be strengthened and increased rapidly and effectively. Without such strengthening and development of education and training, the pre-conditions of vigorous economic growth cannot be established.
DEVELOPMENT LOAN FUND
In the field of development assistance, the Development Loan Fund is proving to be an increasingly effective instrument for response to those needs which cannot be satisfied from private investment, the World Bank or other like sources. It has assisted in the installation of basic facilities, such as power and transportation, necessary for growth in the less developed areas. Particularly important are the expanded activities of the Development Loan Fund in the field of private enterprise. The Development Loan Fund is opening new opportunities to build an effective partnership with American private enterprise wherein the private resources of the country can make an increased contribution to development in the less developed nations. The history of the Development Loan Fund activity over the past two years indicates that the flow of such loan capital has tended to respond to the degree of need and of capability. In other words, those areas where the determination and the will to progress are greatest and the capacity to use such resource effectively is the greatest, have been the leading recipients of loan assistance from the Development Loan Fund. I request $700 million for the Development Loan Fund for use beginning in fiscal year 1961.
SOUTH ASIA
Over the past two years a major share of Development Loan Fund loans have been made to the two great nations of South As]a, India and Pakistan, where half a billion people are deeply committed and irrevocably determined to develop and maintain institutions of their own free choice, and to raise their standards of living to levels of decency. The force and drive of this great effort is unmistakable; it warrants the full and warm support of the free world. We have joined with other nations in helping these countries; we envisage the total public and private effort to assist South Asia not only continuing but expanding. An increased amount is expected to be devoted to this great cause from the resources requested for the Development Loan Fund for Fiscal Year 1961 as these countries increase even further their own self-help efforts.
THE INDUS BASIN DEVELOPMENT
A development of major significance in South Asia is the substantial progress being made under the auspices of the World Bank to effect a solution to the complex and difficult problem of the use of the waters of the Indus River Basin as between India and Pakistan. Vital interests of both countries are involved; the solution must involve a plan whereby the waters, on which the agriculture, the food supplies, and the economies of the region depend, can be equitably developed and shared. It is anticipated that an agreement on such a development plan may be reached in the near future. Essential to its fruition is the willingness of nations outside South Asia to assist in the development plan, the cost of which cannot be borne by these nations unaided. Under World Bank auspices, plans are being developed whereunder the Bank, British Commonwealth nations, West Germany, and the United States will each contribute to the costs of the development plan and the supervision and management of the enterprise will be undertaken by the Bank. We propose to provide a measure of assistance to this activity through the Mutual Security Program in fiscal year 1961 and in subsequent years as needs arise. To assure that we can effectively participate in this multilateral undertaking, I am asking for authorization to exercise flexibility in the application of regulations normally applied to bilateral undertakings, if and when such exceptional action is required for this great project. The solution of this troublesome international issue should be of great assistance in promoting a peaceful and cooperative resolution of other divisive issues and encourage a maximum concentration on the major goals of peace and prosperity.
REPUBLIC OF CHINA
The Mutual Security Program can be expected also to be responsive to the needs of other areas and countries as their determination and capacity to employ development capital grows. We have received proposals from the Government of the Republic of China for an expanded and accelerated program of economic reform and development to which we are giving dose and careful attention. The vigorous and skilled population on Taiwan, the record of growth in investment and output, the very real potential for acceleration, offer a prospect for a convincing demonstration that under free institutions a pace and degree of achievement can eventually be obtained in excess of that resulting under totalitarianism. For this purpose, we envisage the full employment of both grant and loan assistance to hasten the day of ultimate viability and self-sustaining growth.
CONTINGENCY FUND AND OTHER PROGRAMS
In addition to the major categories of cooperation which I have mentioned, Military Assistance and Defense Support, Special Assistance, Technical Cooperation and the Development Loan Fund, I am asking also for a Contingency Fund of $175 million and for $ I o I million to continue a variety of small but important programs.
The Contingency Fund is an essential safeguard against the unforeseen or not wholly predictable need. The record of the past several years clearly demonstrates its value as enabling prompt and effective response to the altering course of international events.
The $101 million requested for other programs will permit our continued participation in UNICEF, in refugee programs and in the foreign programs for peaceful uses of atomic energy. It also will provide for administrative costs to administer the economic and technical programs.
For the total Mutual Security Program I ask $4.175 billion. The need for these amounts has been examined and re-examined with great care in the Executive Branch. I am entirely satisfied that the needs for which funds are sought are needs which must be met and that the funds sought are the most reasonable estimates of requirements we can produce. There is no question but that the nation can afford the expenditures involved; I am certain we cannot afford to ignore the needs for which they are required.
CONCLUSION
The United States is a privileged nation. Its citizens enjoy a measure of prosperity and well-being and an extent of liberty under free institutions unequalled in the history of the world. Our ideals and our ideology place upon us a responsibility for leadership and for cooperation with other nations and other peoples which we accept willingly and with pride.
My recent travels impressed upon me even more strongly the fact that free men everywhere look to us, not with envy or malice but with hope and confidence that we will in the future as in the past be in the vanguard of those who believe in and will defend the right of the individual to enjoy the fruits of his labor in peace and in freedom. Together with our fellow men, we shall not fail to meet our responsibilities.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER