Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 26, 1960

Remarks at the U.S. Embassy Residence in Buenos Aires Upon Receiving the Key to the City.
I AM DEEPLY HONORED not only for the presentation of this key, symbolic of the friendly spirit of your country for the United States, but for the generosity of the terms in which your Mayor has described the ideals and democratic aspirations that bind his country with mine.
If I may be personal, I should like to tell you a bit of a story. Forty-five years ago now, I was just preparing to graduate from West Point-- our military school in the United States. I had been badly injured and the medical corps decided that I should not become a lieutenant in the Army. I was called before the board and I think they thought that I would be a heartbroken young man. I said, "Well, it's all right with me, if you just give me my diploma, I am going down to the Argentine." They were a bit surprised, and I said, "Well, it strikes me to be a fine place to go."
Now by the favorable action of the board, my intent of that time was spoiled, but it was never given up. For 45 years I have held the hope to go and meet the people of this beautiful city, and to visit this great country. I know I shall have a wonderful trip--[helicopter noise]--to renew that urge of mine to come back here than any other thing I could possibly have said when he said, "Argentina is going to be one of the great leading democracies not only of the Western World but all the world." And with that kind of ambition, I am for him one hundred percent, and I feel that it is a great privilege for me to come back to return his friendly call.
Mr. Mayor, again I thank you for the honor.
Note: The key to the city was presented by Mayor Hernan M. Giralt.
The missing text was later reconstructed by Ambassador Beaulac. In a memorandum dated July 26, 1960, the State Department informed the White House that the Ambassador believed the portion in question should read as follows, the missing words being italicized: "I know I shall have a wonderful trip. 1 told President Frondizi in Washington about my early plan to come to Argentina and my talk with him served more to renew that urge of mine to come back here than any other thing I could possibly have said when he said 'Argentina is going to be one of the great leading democracies not only of the' Western World but all the world.'"