Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 17, 1956

Veto of Bill To Amend the Natural Gas Act.
To the House of Representatives:
I am unable to approve H. R. 6645 "To Amend the Natural Gas Act as Amended." This I regret because I am in accord with its basic objectives.
Since the passage of this Bill, a body of evidence has accumulated indicating that private persons, apparently representing only a very small segment of a great and vital industry, have been seeking to further their own interests by highly questionable activities. These include efforts that I deem to be so arrogant and so much in defiance of acceptable standards of propriety as to risk creating doubt among the American people concerning the integrity of governmental processes.
Legally constituted agencies of government are now engaged in investigating this situation. These investigations cannot be concluded before the expiration of the ten-day period within which the President must act upon the legislation under the Constitution.
I believe I would not be discharging my own duty were I to approve this legislation before the activities in question have been fully investigated by the Congress and the Department of Justice. To do so under such conditions could well create long-term apprehension in the minds of the American people. It would be a disservice both to the people and to their Congress. Accordingly, I return H. R. 6645 without my approval.
At the same time, I must make quite clear that legislation conforming to the basic objectives of H. R. 6645 is needed. It is needed because the type of regulation of producers of natural gas which is required under present law will discourage individual initiative and incentive to explore for and develop new sources of supply.
In the long run this will limit supplies of gas which is contrary not only to the national interest but especially to the interest of consumers.
I feel that any new legislation, in addition to furthering the long-term interest of consumers in plentiful supplies of gas, should include specific language protecting consumers in their right to fair prices.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER