Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 28, 1957

Statement by the President Marking the Opening of the 1957 Red Cross Drive.
[Recorded on film and tape for use in connection with the 1957 Red Cross Drive]
My Fellow Americans:
The concept of neighbor, "good neighbor," is part of the American heritage. We are a Nation of neighbors and we live in a world of neighbors. And the way we give effective testimony to this principle is by freely sharing our skills and resources with others needing them.
For many years, the neighborly effectiveness of each individual American has been enlarged by great voluntary organizations like the American National Red Cross. Through the Red Cross, we can all, acting together, be a mighty help to many neighbors in distress wherever they may be--across the street, across the Nation or across the seas.
Through the Red Cross, by Act of Congress, we can help members of our Armed Forces and their families stationed in posts around the world. I have seen this work and it is good.
Through the Red Cross, we can take part in the largest single voluntary blood-collecting program in the Nation. This activity can be vital to any of us in a personal emergency. We can help gather and process and distribute a great volume of free, life-giving blood to any, including ourselves, who may suffer from disease or injury.
Whenever disaster strikes, we can bring strong support to our neighbors through the Red Cross. During the floods of 1955 and '56, on both the East and West Coasts, we assisted over 35,000 families in their need. Just recently, in the California forest fires and the Appalachian floods, the Red Cross acted for us by bringing emergency care to many of our neighbors there. In meeting nearly one disaster each day of this past year, the Red Cross set a new record for voluntary emergency relief.
Then, a few months ago, the concept of neighborliness was extended beyond our own borders to the tragic area of eastern Europe. There, the Red Cross began--on our behalf--the greatest international relief operation since World War II. This was to meet the needs of our friends in Hungary.
Working through the International Red Cross, we have provided tons of food, fuel, clothing and medical supplies to our needy neighbors both within and outside Hungary. Some 45,000 Hungarian refugees in Austria are now dependent in part upon our neighborly assistance through the League of Red Cross Societies.
To help carry on all this work, at home and abroad, I know the American people will continue to supply the Red Cross with the necessary funds and volunteers. This is one of the finest ways to practice the principle of "good neighbors" on a broad scale.
As Honorary President of the National Red Cross, and as a citizen of the United States, I urge every American to participate in the 1957 Red Cross drive.