Dwight D. Eisenhower
February 19, 1959

Remarks on Arrival at the Airport, Acapulco, Mexico.
Mr. President, and Citizens of this great Republic:

Ever since the inauguration of your President, I have wanted to come to this country, that I may pay to him my respects as he takes over the great office of President and assumes the responsibilities and the authorities that devolve upon that office.
I do this because of the common knowledge in our own country--my country--that friendship with the Mexican people and with the Mexican government is, for us, a necessity.
We have with you a very long, common border. We do not want-ever--to see that border defended by guns and by the machines of war. We want it to be guarded by the friendship that lives within the hearts of your people and of ours. And that friendship must be borne and must be nurtured by a common respect for the human values that are the foundations for the forms of government we have.
Each of us, through different circumstances, has found independence and has developed liberty for each of its citizens. So that we can say with truth that the dignity of man, the rights of every individual are the motives that bind us together and makes certain that this friendship of which I speak shall never be destroyed.
I have been moved by your President's words in saying that on both sides he knows we are trying to solve our common problems in this spirit of understanding and of friendship. I can assure you, Mr. President, and I assure all your people, of our determination always to meet you halfway-we would hope more than halfway--that we may achieve this kind of result.
And now, sir, may I assure you that not only I but all the people of the United States would want me to say to you today: we hope, we trusts we pray, that the friendship between our two peoples will ever grow, so that we may be stronger in freedom, in justice, in prosperity--in the happiness of every single individual in each country down to the remotest village of our two countries.
Sir, this is a very great honor that you have permitted me to enjoy this morning, of coming to visit you on your home land. And for it, I assure you, I am grateful.