Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 15, 1959

Executive Order 10800—Implementing the Government Employees Training Act
By virtue of the authority vested in me by section 301 of title 3 of the United States Code and by the Government Employees Training Act (72 Stat. 327), it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. As used in this order, the term "Act" means the Government Employees Training Act (72 Stat. 327), and the terms "Government," "department," "employee," "Commission," and "training" have the meanings given to those terms, respectively, by section 3 of the Act.
SEC. 2. The head of each department shall, consonant with the Act, this order, and the regulations of the Civil Service Commission issued pursuant to the Act and section 5 of this order:
(a) review periodically the immediate and long-range needs of the department for employee training and in so doing take special care to identify those instances in which training will increase the economy and efficiency of departmental operations;
(b) formulate plans of action to meet such training needs;
(c) establish and maintain, to the maximum extent feasible, needed training programs;
(d) establish adequate administrative controls to insure that training improves the performance of employees, and contributes to the economy, efficiency, and effective operation of the department and to the attainment of its program goals;
(e) stimulate and encourage employee self-development and self-training;
(f) utilize the training facilities and services of other departments to the extent practicable, provide training facilities and services to other departments when practical and without interference with the department's mission, and cooperate in the development of interdepartmental employee training activities; and
(g) approve the acceptance of any contributions, awards, or payments to employees authorized by section 19(a) of the Act and regulations issued by the Commission pursuant to section 5(b) of this order only when the department head deems such contributions, awards or payments appropriate to meet reasonable costs incurred or to be incurred by the recipient incident to the training or attendance at a meeting and when, in the view of the department head, the purpose, amount and type of contribution, award or payment would not place or tend to place the recipient under any improper obligation to the grantor.
SEC. 3. There is hereby delegated to the heads of departments, severally and in respect of the employees of the respective departments, the authority, vested in the President by section 3(7) of the Act, to designate foreign governments or international organizations, or instrumentalities of either, as eligible to provide training under the Act; provided that each such designation shall be made only after the department concerned has obtained and given due consideration to the advice of the Department of State thereon.
SEC. 4. The following-described functions, vested in the President by the Act, are hereby delegated to the Commission:
(a) The authority, under section 4 (b) of the Act, (1) to designate any department or part thereof, or any employee or employees therein, as excepted from the Act or any provision of the Act other than sections 4, 19(c), 21, 22, and 23(a), and (2) to designate any such department or part thereof, or any such employee or employees therein, so excepted by the Commission, as again subject to the Act or any such provision of the Act.
(b) The authority, under section 19(a) of the Act, to fix by regulation the extent to which the contributions, awards, and payments referred to in the said section 19(a) may be made to and accepted by employees.
SEC. 5. (a) In performing functions vested in it by the Act or delegated to it by this order, the Commission shall consult with the Special Assistant to the President for Personnel Management.
(b) The Special Assistant to the President for Personnel Management may, from time to time and partly or wholly, (1) exclude any specific matter or matters from the operation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, and (2) terminate any exclusion effected under this subsection (b).
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
January 15, 1959.