Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 20, 1960

Remarks to Participants in the Young Republican National Leadership Training School.
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen:
It is indeed a most unexpected and a very welcome reception that you have given me. I expected to find a bunch of desks and people having their pads and pencils out and working here in a sort of office. I don't know why I didn't expect it was a luncheon.
In a very few months we are going to come to a great decision in America. That decision has to be made by the electorate--the adult citizens of the United States.
My life has been largely spent in affairs that required organization. But organization itself, necessary as it is, is never sufficient to win a battle.
The first thing I would like to speak to you about is the cause, the purpose, for which you struggle. You have to believe something with your whole souls or you will never be effective in a political or any other campaign. You have to believe that government has a certain relationship to its citizen, certain responsibilities toward that citizen, including the responsibility to let the citizen alone when there should be no interference. You have got to understand how this kind of concept can translate into your daily and local problems; and then you must believe that this is the most important thing at this moment to get done.
I don't think that I need to say anything about the enthusiasm with which you do this. Your very presence here attests to the enthusiasm you have for the venture in which you are already launched. But we need, then, in the kind of organizations that I have known, to know why we are fighting, what we are fighting for--and to have leaders to organize and crystallize these thoughts, these ideals, these purposes, make them plain to the entire group, and then organize it so that it is invincible.
This is what I know you are doing. You are here as leaders. Organization should be carried down to the last detail. If we as Republicans don't make certain that every citizen, be he Democrat, Independent, or Republican, has had the opportunity to hear our explanation, then to that extent we have failed. If we are incapable of bringing to him at least the sense of the earnestness of our own convictions, we have likewise failed. If he is so rooted in tradition or preconception, or just plain stubbornness that he doesn't recognize your wisdom, why that's too bad. There are some like that, of course.
But you must make sure that you give your story to this man in the best way you possibly can.
The last thing is these leaders. I would hope that every one of you would put your whole selves, your whole souls, into the matter of seeing that the people you put in the positions of leadership--not merely the man you nominate for President, or for Governor, or county chairman or State chairman--but the person you select as a precinct worker, right down the line--have an organization, a purpose for which to work, and the leaders, including yourselves, to make this whole thing effective.
Finally, let's not forget this one thing: just hard work--hard work in recruiting.
Many years ago there was a Kansas farmer boy. His name was Bristow. He had one great act to his credit at least: he appointed me to West Point. [Laughter] But he was not a great speaker--there was nothing brilliant about him.
One day a colleague, comparing him with another, said this man was a racy, speedy horse; he was showy, fast, and handy. He said Bristow was more a Clydesdale--he was made for draft work--he did the heavy work. But he said he noticed that whatever Bristow went after he achieved. Just the plain ability to stay in, day after day, carrying the burden, never quitting, is one of the things that Bristow was famous for. And he said one little thing that is going to be the last word I say to you. He said, "Just remember this: in public life moral and political courage cannot be attained after you enter that service. You must have it before, if you are going to do your part in sustaining the moral and political courage of the nation itself."
I have talked far longer than I meant. I just can't tell you how grateful I am to each of you for what you are doing to keep up and preserve moderate government, and to get the kind of candidates you can support--not only you support, because you are Young Republicans, but that you can get a lot of other people to support. I don't mean that they have to be matinee idols. You have an example right in front of you where that wasn't important--but I do say they must be leaders, people who believe with their whole hearts in what you are working for-and then we will win.
Good luck to you. I will see a lot of you, I hope, here and there in the months to come until we can have another victory celebration in early November.
Goodbye and good luck.
Note: The President spoke at the Willard Hotel in Washington. At the conclusion of his remarks, Ned Cushing, Chairman of the Young Republican National Federation, presented a citation to the President on behalf of the faculty of the Young Republican National Leadership Training School.