Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 17, 1961

Executive Order 10909—Amendment of Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and statutes of the United States, and as President of the United States, and as Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, Executive Order No. 10865 of February 20, 1960 (25 F.R. 1583), is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 1(c) is amended to read as follows:
"(c) When used in this order, the term 'head of a department' means the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Commissioners of the Atomic Energy Commission, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency, the head of any other department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under subsection (b) of this section, and, in sections 4 and 8, includes the Attorney General. The term 'department' means the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Federal Aviation Agency, any other department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under subsection (b) of this section, and, in sections 4 and 8, includes the Department of Justice."
SEC. 2. Section 6 is amended to read as follows:
"SEC. 6. The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency, or his representative, or the head of any other department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under section 1(b), or his representative, may issue, in appropriate cases, invitations and requests to appear and testify in order that the applicant may have the opportunity to cross-examine as provided by this order. Whenever a witness is so invited or requested to appear and testify at a proceeding and the witness is an officer or employee of the executive branch of the Government or a member of the armed forces of the United States, and the proceeding involves the activity in connection with which the witness is employed, travel expenses and per diem are authorized as provided by the Standardized Government Travel Regulations or the Joint Travel Regulations, as appropriate. In all other cases (including non-Government employees as well as officers or employees of the executive branch of the Government or members of the armed forces of the United States not covered by the foregoing sentence), transportation in kind and reimbursement for actual expenses are authorized in an amount not to exceed the amount payable under Standardized Government Travel Regulations. An officer or employee of the executive branch of the Government or a member of the armed forces of the United States who is invited or requested to appear pursuant to this paragraph shall be deemed to be in the performance of his official duties. So far as the national security permits, the head of the investigative agency involved shall cooperate with the Secretary, the Administrator, or the head of the other department or agency, as the case may be, in identifying persons who have made statements adverse to the applicant and in assisting him in making them available for cross-examination. If a person so invited is an officer or employee of the executive branch of the Government or a member of the armed forces of the United States, the head of the department or agency concerned shall cooperate in making that person available for cross-examination."
SEC. 3. Section 8 is amended by striking out the word "or" at the end of clause (5), by striking out the period at the end of clause (6) and inserting "; or" in place thereof, and by adding the following new clause at the end thereof:
"(7) the deputy of that department, or the principal assistant to the head of that department, as the case may be, in the case of authority vested in the head of a department or agency of the United States with which the Department of Defense makes an agreement under section 1 (b)."
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
January 17, 1961.