Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 03, 1961

Statement by the President Following Announcement of Recipients of the President's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service.
THE EXEMPLARY achievements of these individuals in the fields of communications, science, administration, conservation, and employee relations have contributed significantly to the furtherance of our national goals. Their distinguished careers are in the finest tradition of service to the American people.
Through these awards a grateful nation honors these men who have dedicated their highest abilities to serving the best interests of this great country.
Our progress toward fulfillment of the high purposes of government depends on the ability of the people who devote their careers to the public service. This progress has been enhanced by the outstanding achievements of many of our civil servants. I take this opportunity to express my faith in the skill and devotion to duty that characterize the Federal work force. These characteristics provide a firm basis for the nation's continued progress in the future.
Note: The President made this statement in announcing his selection of the following persons to receive the awards: Bert B. Barnes, Assistant Postmaster General, Bureau of Operations, Post Office Department, for "a vital role in providing a vastly improved postal service for the American people despite unprecedented increases in mail volume"; Wilbur S. Hinman, Jr., Technical Director, Diamond Ordnance Fuze Laboratories, Department of the Army, for "brilliant leadership of scientists and engineers in the creation of new electronic techniques and devices having both military and civilian uses, and his own technical contributions"; Frederick J. Lawton, Commissioner, U.S. Civil Service Commission, for "signal success in improving Government management, in perfecting the Federal budget system, and in furthering advancements in personnel management"; Richard E. McArdle, Chief, Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, for "imagination, vision, and inspiring leadership [which] have brought exceptional progress in the development and protection of vital forest resources for the American people now and for generations to follow"; William R. McCauley, Director, Bureau of Employees' Compensation, Department of Labor, for "unusual foresight, judgment and executive competence [through which] he has exercised a profound influence in developing the Federal employees' compensation system to serve the human needs of the times."
Gold medals were presented by the President to the award winners in a White House ceremony on January 11.