Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 30, 1957

Letter in Response to Report of Mrs. Eugene Meyer, Chairman, District of Columbia Auditorium Commission.
Dear Mrs. Meyer:
Thank you for your letter of January thirtieth transmitting the report and recommendations of the District of Columbia Auditorium Commission, which, under the law creating the Commission, are also submitted to the Congress.
The passage of legislation providing for the Commission was indeed a major step forward in the quest for positive proposals to help solve the long-felt need for a national civic auditorium in the District of Columbia. Even a brief perusal of the brochure reveals most clearly the thorough and painstaking manner in which you, your fellow members, and those to whom you looked for assistance and advice, approached your task.
I am confident that, as the report is evaluated, there will be full realization of the contribution that the Commission has made in laying the groundwork for the further steps necessary to provide in our capital city a civic auditorium and cultural center worthy of our great nation.
I trust that this assignment has brought to you and each member of the Commission a great deal of personal satisfaction, and I assure you that I appreciate your splendid presentation of your recommendations.
With best wishes,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The report of the District of Columbia Auditorium Commission (established by Pub. Law 128, 84th Cong.; 69 Stat. 243) was included in an illustrated 95-page brochure entitled "Plans for a National Civic Auditorium and Cultural Center for the Citizens of the United States." A copy of the brochure is on file at the Library of Congress.
In her letter of transmittal, Mrs. Meyer pointed out that the Commission recommended the construction of a multipurpose building and suggested three sites which would be suitable for the Center. She further stated that "the Commission hopes that the Federal Government will provide the site, and it believes that the major costs of construction should be raised by private subscription."