Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 14, 1960

Special Message to the Congress on Transfers From the Department of Defense to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
To the Congress of the United States:
In pursuance of the provisions of section 309 of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 1 transmit herewith a transfer plan headed "Making certain transfers from the Department of Defense to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration." This message, together with the transfer plan, constitutes the report to the Congress, relative to the transfers, as required by the provisions of section 302.
Under the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has primary responsibility for the Nation's program of space exploration. The Department of Defense has responsibility for the Nation's defense program, including the development and operation of space vehicles for defense purposes.
I have recently reviewed the needs and requirements of the two agencies in their respective fields. It is clear that NASA, in order to carry on a vigorous and effective program for the exploration of space, both manned and unmanned, requires boosters for space vehicles greatly exceeding the thrust of any boosters now available. Furthermore, there is at present no clear Department of Defense requirement for such very large boosters. For this reason I assigned sole responsibility for development of space vehicle boosters of very high thrust to NASA last November. In carrying out this responsibility NASA will be fully responsive to specific requirements of the Department of Defense for the development of very large boosters for future military missions. At the same time the Department of Defense and NASA will continue with a coordinated program for the development of boosters based on the current intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and the intermediate range ballistic missile (IRBM) and growth versions of those missiles.
On the basis of this assignment of responsibility the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has assumed technical direction of the Saturn booster project which was previously under the direction of the Department of Defense. This booster which promises to increase greatly the Nation's ability to explore space is being developed by the Army Ballistic Missile Agency and will soon constitute the major workload of the Development Operations Division of that Agency.
The foregoing reflects the pertinent arrangements as they now exist. I have concluded that it is in the best interest of the Nation to take another step at this time--to provide NASA with an organization capable of and equipped for developing and operating large space vehicle boosters and conducting related research. This can be done by transferring to NASA the Development Operations Division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency and certain supporting personnel. At the same time it is recognized that the Army must continue to be able to discharge its responsibilities for development of missile systems. The transfer plan forwarded herewith is designed to accomplish these purposes.
In carrying out the transfer plan every effort will be made to prevent the dislocation or disruption of ongoing missile or space vehicle projects. The development of military weapons systems and related programs, currently being worked on by the Development Operations Division, will be continued by the Army, utilizing the skills of the transferred personnel as requested by the Army, on a reimbursable basis.
The transfer of personnel, property, and funds, under the plan, will be accomplished in such manner as to serve the objectives I have outlined.
I urge the Congress to allow the transfer plan transmitted herewith to take effect.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The plan entitled "Making Certain Transfers from the Department of Defense to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration" became effective on March 15, 1960. It is published in the Federal Register of March 16 (25 F.R. 2151) and in the 1960 Supplement to title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations.