Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 19, 1956

Telegram to the Deputy Secretary of State of New Hampshire, Concerning Appearance on the Primary Ballot.
The Honorable Harry E. Jackson

Deputy Secretary of State

State House

Concord, New Hampshire
I have your courteous telegram of January fourteenth, advising me that petitions have been filed at your office which qualify my name for inclusion on the Presidential preference primary ballot of the Republican Party in the State of New Hampshire.
Naturally, I am deeply gratified that the petitioners have expressed this kind of personal confidence in me. I do not feel that I should interpose any objection to such entry.
However, because I must make clear to all that lack of objection cannot be construed as any final decision on my part relative to a candidacy for a second term in the office I now hold, I hope that all who vote in the Republican primaries in 1956 will carefully weigh all the possibilities and personalities that may be involved.
Freedom to select, nominate and elect a candidate to public office is basic to our American political system. Because I deeply believe that every citizen should have the widest possible choice in expressing his own preference in such matters, I would hope that the accident of my illness and the necessary period for determining the degree of my recovery would not have the effect of interfering with the privilege of every member of our Party to express his preference for the Presidential candidate of his choice.
It would be idle to pretend that my health can be wholly restored to the excellent state in which the doctors believed it to be in mid-September. At the same time, my doctors report to me that the progress I am making toward a reasonable level of strength is normal and satisfactory. My future life must be carefully regulated to avoid excessive fatigue. My reasons for obedience to the medical authorities are not solely personal; I must obey them out of respect for the responsibilities I carry.
The personal decision to which I refer will be rendered as soon as it is firmly fixed in my own mind. I shall strive to see that it is based as to my best judgment on the good of our country.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The President read this telegram at the opening of his news conference on January 19, 1956 (see Item 16).