Dwight D. Eisenhower
January 27, 1960

Address in Los Angeles to the Nationwide Republican "Dinner With Ike" Rallies.
Mr. Vice President, Chairman Morton, fellow Republicans, and all other supporters of good government:
First, may I thank the Los Angeles audience here for the warmth of your personal welcome. I am deeply grateful. And I must say a word to all those workers, all those good Republicans that made this dinner such a success and started this year off as a good Republican one. And on top of that, I am overwhelmed by the verbal tributes that have come from my friends and associates and that we have heard over the television. It is indeed a proud moment for me.
Before leaving early in December for a tour of foreign nations, I received a letter from a young lady, who lives in Arvada, Colorado. It reads:
"My dear Mr. President,"
I have just turned 21 years of age. I am now old enough to vote and mature enough to take part in political elections.
"My problem is, which party am I best suited to serve. I thought you would be able to help me by telling me what the Republican Party stands for. What are its goals and in what way may I help it to achieve them?"
Since that time, her letter has been much on my mind. Thinking about this evening's program, I asked friends to invite her and her husband to the Denver dinner, in the hope that I may convince her that she wants to be a Republican. So--Shirley Jean, to you, and I trust, to all other young or undecided voters I can reach, here is my answer.
First of all--I am sure what you mean to ask is not what party you can best serve, but rather through what party you can best serve your country.
I start by observing that no party, at any one time, embraces all of the policies and beliefs any of us might deem ideal. Yet a major party, through its platforms, programs, record, and leaders, takes on a character and appearance of its own before the public.
Tonight, we are concerned with Republican beliefs with what Republicans have accomplished, particularly over the past 7 years--and with how we are trying to perform the tasks ahead.
Republican conviction, since the days of Lincoln, has always held that people are supreme. Our party first came into power to bring equal protection of the law to our people.
Republicans insist that the personal, political, and economic freedoms of the individual are his most precious possessions and are inseparable. If any one of these is lost, eventually all others must disappear. Never should a citizen transfer any of his own rights and responsibilities to government, except in those cases where necessity dearly demands. Indeed, the first and more sacred responsibility of government is to help people protect their inalienable individual freedoms. Now these convictions form the foundation of the entire Republican structure of political doctrine and practice.
It is true that government has to do many things which, individually, we cannot do for ourselves. So, for example, local governments provide police protection and street maintenance. But the principle still holds true; governments must refrain from unnecessary meddling in the daily, normal problems of living and working.
Now today one of the sharpest controversies in public life is centered on economic freedom. Many feel that economic life has become so complicated that individuals and private business cannot function fairly and profitably. They hold that economic progress now depends largely upon Federal intervention and Federal appropriations.
Republicans flatly reject the argument that the Nation can pump its way to permanent prosperity by an outpouring. of Federal dollars. We are opposed to those extremists who argue that the Federal Government should become the master mechanic of our economy--with sweeping authority to tinker with the free processes of the competitive enterprise system. That system provides the best possible protection to our own personal and political freedoms and to individual opportunity. Moreover, it is the most productive system ever devised.
Only when an activity is operated most efficiently as a practical national monopoly should it be a Federal responsibility, as for example, interstate highways and the handling of the mails. But the production of the automobiles on the highways, or the stationery we use in the mails, should always be privately done.
Now we go to a second basic Republican doctrine. A healthy, free society requires a wide diffusion of power and responsibility. Power belongs to all the people, and citizens should never permit its excessive concentration in any hands--industrial combines, labor groupments, or even government.
Concentration of power is dangerous and susceptible to abuse. It courts disaster for the individual.
Already too much power and responsibility--and tax money--have drifted to Washington.
Therefore, in all those things that must be done by government we strive to have the responsibility borne by local and State governments, which are closest to the people.
But even adherence to this Republican conviction finds the Federal Government carrying immense responsibilities. The list is a long one. For example--the Government must develop a national defense in which our citizens can have confidence. It must so manage its fiscal and financial affairs as to prevent the debasement of our currency, thus helping to protect the citizens' savings, pensions, and insurance from erosive inflation.
It must assist in developing water power; conserving and reclaiming land resources; cooperating with States and institutions in education; relieving hardships in areas where individuals are not able to find employment; in supporting medical, agricultural, and other research so that American science and technology will be able to meet every challenge of the future; helping eliminate the vast and difficult problems in agriculture as well as the human and material blight that is imposed upon many of our cities by crowded slums; developing a cooperative program among Federal, State, and city authorities to reduce the hazards of travel on America's skyways. There are dozens of other Federal responsibilities.
And for this reason the National Government owes it to every citizen to see that all of these approved programs--some of them costing billions of dollars--are performed efficiently and economically. Integrity in Government is mandatory.
The Republican record in all these things is one to merit the confidence of every American citizen.
Let us look at specific cases:
Providing an effective defense is a vital service that the Federal Government must perform in a world divided by opposing ideologies. This is a nonpartisan subject--but of such vast importance that it is necessary for us to take note of its administration these past 7 years.
The real test is to provide security in a way that effectively deters aggression but does not itself weaken the values and institutions we seek to defend. This demands the most careful calculation and balance, as well as steadiness of purpose, not to be disturbed by noisy trumpeting about dazzling military schemes or untrustworthy programs. Neither effort nor expense has been spared to provide a sure defense. Moreover, we have not wasted our strength or resources.
Because of our insistence upon adequacy and efficiency, our country is, over-all, the strongest power on earth, both militarily and economically.
Nevertheless, America's unchanging goal for decades has been the pursuit of peace--through negotiation from a position of strength, in concert with other nations that share our ideals.
We and our loyal friends are striving to make it possible for the new or less industrialized nations to strengthen themselves economically and where necessary, militarily--so that all of us together can live and prosper in peace. These programs we call Mutual Security. They comprise part of our whole effort to keep the free world strong, safe, and free. There is no more vital program that is to be executed within the Federal Government.
Reviewing the foreign field over these 7 years:
The independence of South Korea has been sustained. Iran was saved for the free world.
The explosive situation in Trieste was resolved. Austria is now a free nation. Stability has returned to Jordan and Lebanon.
Today, there is no war. The international atmosphere .recently shows signs of improvement.
Now we seek ironclad self-enforcing agreements on the grave issues of nuclear test suspension, arms control, the status of Germany and Berlin. Progress is slow and frustrations many, but we shall continue to approach the task with patience, firmness, and candor.
Though national security and programs for strengthening the free world are costly, we can provide for them adequately and can do so while keeping ourselves economically solvent and fiscally sound. But to do this we must, first, make the national need our sole guide for expenditures. Extravagance and security are mutually hostile--and in prosperous times like the present, only Federal extravagance can plunge us needlessly and deeper into debt.
Republicans believe that America is tired of a constantly growing debt--with annual bills for interest alone well over nine billion dollars. We want to stop the cowardly habit of passing our own obligations as a mortgage to our children. This is a first Republican determination.
So, when we consider a new Federal project, we ask ourselves whether it is truly necessary, or does it merely serve the selfish desire of some particular group? Is it of such importance to the Nation as to justify either an increase in taxes or an addition to our debt--which spurs a constant rise in prices, and a cheapening of the currency.
Do we want or need to saddle the taxpayer with ever greater taxes?
And Republicans say No! And they have acted and are acting accordingly.
This good Republican record extends into many fields. Consider education.
Today, the Federal Government is aiding America's schools and colleges in many vital ways. Among these is a program for constructing great numbers of additional classrooms, to supply great deficiencies. But, again, the Republican policy is to help the States help themselves-not to allow a Federal take-over of America's institutions of learning.
In agriculture our purpose is to assist the farmer in meeting adverse conditions over which he has no control; flood, drought, and unreasonable fluctuations in the price of farm products. Antiquated legislation in this field has built up huge and costly surpluses that depress prices and rapidly grow unmanageable. Republicans have devised and supported legislation to help correct these conditions, but the majority opposition in Congress has prevented its passage. We want our farms to be run by farmers, not Washington bureaucrats. And above all we want our farmers to receive their fair share of the Nation's income.
The Department of Health, Education, and Welfare has, in 6 years, spent over one billion dollars in Federal aid for medical research seeking to find cures for killing and crippling diseases. The discoveries made are immediately available to any individual or group who can use them. At the same time we are determined that the Federal Government is not going to displace the family doctor.
This is just another example of Republican efforts--and there are many others--to satisfy human needs, with government help where necessary, but not through government domination.
To pay for costly and highly publicized "phony" panaceas for all our problems, many politicians seem to believe that money by the bale can be printed without shrinking--a kind of Sanforized dollar! Well, we know better!
And it is the unshakable aim of the Republican Party to make certain that your dollar will buy today and tomorrow as much as it did yesterday. In the 7 years just preceding 1953 our general price structure went up an unconscionable 48%. In the 7 Republican years since 1953 the price rise has been held to 10%. This record is one for every thinking citizen to applaud, but it is not good enough--we Republicans propose to make it better.
If we are to hold down prices, one thing we must do is avoid excessive governmental spending so you may have more money for the things you want for yourself.
The Republican program this year avoids any increase in the debt. Next year that debt will be reduced by a substantial amount.
And remember--more Americans are working than ever before. Real per capita income has never been higher. This is true prosperity. In every way, America enters this new decade stronger than ever before.
One other point--Republicans have faith in America, her strength, her destiny. Yet in late years, the tendency to disparage the unmatched power and prestige of our country has become an obsession with noisy extremists. Time and again we hear spurious assertions that America's defenses are weak; that her economic expansive force can be sustained only by Federal spending; that her educational and health efforts are deficient. In this kind of preachment, political morticians are exhibiting a breast beating pessimism in the American system.
Of this I am certain; America's economic strength is not in Washington, D.C., nor in public spending. It is in the creativeness and industry and spirit of our people.
Fellow Republicans, our duty is to make certain that our party is always better qualified than any other to guide our national destiny.
This involves a deep sense of individual responsibility.
In the great and divinely-ordained sweep of time, it is our children who live at the forward edge of history. The future belongs to them and to those who are to follow. We must not by our actions or inaction today, tarnish the bright prospects for that future.
And so I close, Shirley Jean, with a postscript directed at a most vital part of your question--what you can do to help achieve these Republican goals.
First, study carefully the great issues facing our Nation.
Second, see your precinct leader and volunteer for doing some of the tasks he will have for you.
Next, make certain to register; don't let your husband and your friends forget to register.
Fourth, bring all your enthusiasm to the business of getting able, personable, Republican candidates to run for public office.
Fifth, vote. Get everybody else to vote.
Sixth, every day of your life support your Nation in its search for a peace with justice, and take an active part in preserving and strengthening those values that in America we place above all else--freedom, equality of opportunity, and human dignity.
So doing, you will be a good Republican and a great citizen.
Thank you and good night.
[Following his formal address the President said:]
I have been asked to make an announcement. As one who has spent a great deal of his life traveling back and forth to. Europe and this country and all over the world, I know only too well how wonderful it sounds in a meeting of this kind to hear one of our traditional patriotic songs. As a salute to our beloved country, I am going to ask Mr. Gordon MacRae and his closed circuit cross-country chorus, the collegiate singers and the Howard University Choir, and all of you seated in this great dinner across the Nation, to stand and sing "God Bless America."
Mr. MacRae, would you please lead off.
[The President's response upon receiving a gold medal award follows:]
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and everybody here, both for my wife and for myself.
This is indeed a great honor. The title of the medal itself is enough to overwhelm one with emotion, and I know that my wife will share my pride and my very great appreciation of this most generous--overgenerous act.
On the part of you, Mr. Chairman, and your organization, to all of you--thank you.
Note: The President spoke at 7:40 p.m. in the Pan Pacific Auditorium in Los Angeles. The address was broadcast by closed-circuit television to similar dinner rallies in 83 cities.
The President was introduced by the Vice President, speaking in Chicago. U.S. Senator Thruston Morton of Kentucky, Chairman of the Republican National Committee, served as toastmaster, speaking in New York. The young lady from Arvada, Colo., to whom the President referred, was Mrs. Shirley Jean Havens.
The presentation of the gold medal bearing the inscription "Peace and Prosperity" was made by Harold Ramser, Chairman of the Republican State Central Committee and of the Los Angeles dinner.