Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 23, 1955

Closing Statement at the Final Meeting of the Heads of Government Conference at Geneva.
Mr. Chairman, Gentlemen:
I welcome and warmly reciprocate the spirit of friendliness and good intent that have characterized the statements of the two preceding speakers. But I do hope that my silence respecting certain of the statements made by the immediately preceding speaker will not by any means be interpreted as acquiescence on my part--far from it.
But it has seemed to me that in the dosing minutes of this conference there is no necessity for me to announce to this conference and to the world the United States position on the important questions we have discussed. These I hope and believe have already been made clear. Therefore it has not seemed particularly fitting once more to recite them in detail. Rather I content myself with some reflections on our work of the past week and an expression of some hopes for the future.
This has been an historic meeting. It has been on the whole a good week. But only history will tell the true worth and real values of our session together. The follow-through from this beginning by our respective Governments will be decisive in the measure of this Conference.
We have talked over plainly a number of the most difficult and perplexing questions affecting our several peoples and indeed the peoples of the entire world.
We did not come here to reach final solutions. We came to see if we might together find the path that would lead to solutions and would brighten the prospects of world peace.
In this final hour of our assembly, it is my judgment that the prospects of a lasting peace with justice, well-being, and broader freedom, are brighter. The dangers of the overwhelming tragedy of modern war are less.
The work of our Foreign Ministers as they strive to implement our directives will be of great importance, perhaps of even more than what we have done here. Theirs is the task, reflecting the substantive policies of their Governments, to reach agreement on courses of action which we here could discuss only in broad terms. I know we all wish them well.
I trust we will all support the necessary adjustments which they may find our Governments must make if we are to resolve our differences in these matters.
If our peoples, in the months and years ahead, broaden their knowledge and their understanding of each other, as we, during this week, have broadened our knowledge of each other, further agreement between our Governments may be facilitated. May this occur in a spirit of justice. May it result in improved well-being, greater freedom, and less of fear or suffering or distress for mankind. May it be marked by more of good will among men. These days will then indeed be ever remembered.
I came to Geneva because I believe mankind longs for freedom from war and rumors of war. I came here because of my lasting faith in the decent instincts and good sense of the people who populate this world of ours. I shall return home tonight with these convictions unshaken, and with the prayer that the hope of mankind will one day be realized.
Note: The President's opening words "Mr. Chairman" referred to Premier Edgar Faure of France who served as chairman at this meeting.