Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 22, 1955

Memorandum to Federal Agencies on the United Fund and Community Chest Campaigns.
Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
This fall over 21 ,000 health, welfare and recreation organizations will combine their appeals in a United Fund or Community Chest campaign in each of 1900 communities across the country. Many campaigns will include the needs of such national agencies as the Red Cross, USO, and those fighting heart disease, cancer, polio, tuberculosis, cerebral palsy and other health problems. Such campaigns will seek substantially more than the $302,500,000 raised last year.
The total will be considerably more than will be raised by all the other health and welfare appeals in the country combined. Clearly then, this fund raising effort is the most important in which any of us will be asked to participate during the ensuing year.
The campaigns will be carried on during the period from Labor Day to Thanksgiving. I am asking all branches of the Federal Government, as well as all citizens and organizations, to concentrate their effort and support on the cause during that period.
To assure the leaders of United Community Campaigns of America, representing local Community Chests and United Funds, of the cooperation of the Federal Government, I have approved the appointment of the Honorable George M. Humphrey, Secretary of the Treasury, as Vice Chairman for the Federal Government of United Community Campaigns.
I am confident that you will extend the full cooperation of your Department in each community throughout the United States and its territories and possessions where it conducts its operations. Such cooperation should include the effective solicitation of all employees, the acceptance of equitable unit goals, and the setting up of an adequate collection method for the convenience of those who wish to make contributions on an installment basis.
It is my hope that all employees will give generously--not because they must, but because they may--keeping in mind the wide variety and large number of organizations they will be supporting through their gifts to this single appeal.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This memorandum was released at Geneva.