Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 03, 1958

Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Agreement With the United Kingdom for Cooperation on Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defense.
To the Congress of the United States:
It has become manifestly clear of late that the countries of the free world must, for their collective defense and mutual help, endeavor to combine their resources and share the large tasks that confront us. This is particularly true in the field of scientific research and development in support of greater collective security, notably in the field of military applications of atomic energy. Close collaboration between scientists and engineers of the United States and the United Kingdom during World War II proved most fruitful.
The free world again faces a similar challenge which the free nations can most effectively meet by cooperating with one another in genuine partnership. I pointed out to the Congress earlier this year that it was "wasteful in the extreme for friendly allies to consume talent and money in solving problems that their friends have already solved--all because of artificial barriers to sharing." Since then the Congress has responded with necessary changes in our legislation on the basis of which this Government has just concluded an Agreement with the Government of the United Kingdom which provides the framework for closer cooperation on uses of atomic energy for mutual defense purposes.
Pursuant to that legislation I am submitting to each House of the Congress an authoritative copy of the Agreement. I am also transmitting a copy of the Secretary of State's letter accompanying authoritative copies of the signed Agreement, a copy of a joint letter from the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Secretary of Defense recommending my approval of this Agreement and a copy of my memorandum in reply thereto setting forth my approval.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The Secretary of State's letter and the joint letter from the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Secretary of Defense, both dated July 3, 1958, together with the text of the Agreement, are published in Senate Report 2041 (85th Cong., 2d sess.). For the President's memorandum of approval, see Item 156, above.