Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 09, 1953

Letter to the Secretary of Agriculture Requesting a Study of the Problems of the Domestic Wool Industry.
Dear Mr. Secretary:
Today I have acted on the recommendation contained in your letter of June 30, 1953, by requesting the United States Tariff Commission to investigate the effects of wool imports on the domestic wool price support program, as authorized under Section 22 of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933, as amended.
You know my concern and reluctance with respect to any measure which tends to hinder foreign trade. I profoundly believe that the security of our country and the cause of world peace demand that we move toward freer and wider trade with friendly foreign countries. I also believe that a real and permanent solution of the long-term wool problem can be found that is consistent with the expansion of our foreign trade. Any such solution must, in the interests of the United States, depend upon progressive action on the domestic front leading toward a better product, lower costs, and broader markets.
As a step in this direction, I believe it is desirable that this investigation by the Tariff Commission be supplemented by a broader study of the domestic factors which have contributed to the decline in sheep numbers and wool production in the United States. In this way we may be able, not only to alleviate an immediate situation, but also contribute materially to the solution of the more basic problems of the domestic wool industry. Therefore, I request that the Department of Agriculture immediately take appropriate steps to implement a comprehensive study of this type. It is important that this project not only analyze the retarding factors now at work with respect to United States wool production, but also set forth constructive suggestions which will promote the development of a sound and prosperous domestic wool industry and at the same time permit an expanding foreign trade.
In order that this study may be of value with respect to the present situation, I request that the findings be available at least in preliminary draft by the time the Tariff Commission makes its report under Section 22. When completed, the study would be submitted to the proposed Commission on Foreign Economic Policy for its consideration.
A copy of my letter to the Chairman of the Tariff Commission requesting an investigation of the wool situation under Section 22 is attached.
Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The President's letter to the Chairman of the Tariff Commission was also released. It directed the Commission to institute an investigation and to report its findings and recommendations as promptly as practicable, in order to permit a decision to be made as early as possible during the 1953 wool marketing Season.
The Secretary of Agriculture's letter of June 30 was not made public by the White House.