Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 13, 1955

Special Message to the Congress Upon Signing the Department of Defense Appropriation Act.
To the Congress of the United States:
I have today approved H.R. 6042, making appropriations for the Department of Defense for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1956, and for other purposes. I have done so because the funds which the bill makes available are urgently needed by the department of Defense. Except for this imperative need, I would have withheld my approval of the bill, for I am advised by the Attorney General that one of its provisions, section 638, constitutes an unconstitutional invasion of the province of the Executive.
Section 638 deals with the authority of the Department of Defense to rid itself of many of the manifold activities that it has been performing with its civilian personnel, and that can be adequately and economically performed by private industry without danger to the national security. That section states that funds appropriated in the bill cannot be used to enable the Secretary of Defense to exercise this authority if, in the case of any activity of the Department proposed to be terminated, the Appropriations Committee of the Senate or the Appropriations Committee of the House of Representatives disapproves such proposed termination.
The Constitution of the United States divides the functions of the Government into three departments--the legislative, the executive, and the judicial--and establishes the principle that they shall be kept separate. Neither may exercise functions belonging to the others. Section 638 violates this constitutional principle.
I believe it to be my duty to oppose such a violation. The Congress has the power and the right to grant or to deny an appropriation. But once an appropriation is made the appropriation must, under the Constitution, be administered by the executive branch of the Government alone, and the Congress has no right to confer upon its committees the power to veto Executive action or to prevent Executive action from becoming effective.
Since the organization of our Government, the President has felt bound to insist that Executive functions be maintained unimpaired by legislative encroachment, just as the legislative branch has felt bound to resist interference with its power by the Executive. To acquiesce in a provision that seeks to encroach upon the proper authority of the Executive establishes a dangerous precedent. I do not, by my approval of H.R. 6042, acquiesce in the provisions of section 638, and to the extent that this section seeks to give to the Appropriations Committees of the Senate and House of Representatives authority to veto or prevent Executive action, such section will be regarded as invalid by the executive branch of the Government in the administration of H.R. 6042, unless otherwise determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
One other rider added to the bill is most unfortunate. This rider--contained in section 630 virtually precludes the services from considering the purchase of foreign-made spun silk yarn for cartridge cloth.
This rider--attached to the bill without adequate opportunity for reasons against it to be presented--runs directly counter to the steps which have been taken by the administration in the field of Government procurement policy. No reason appears why foreign-made spun silk yarn, or indeed any other article or commodity of foreign origin, should be singled out for special exemption from the general provisions of the "Buy American" legislation. By making it virtually impossible for our friends abroad to sell us goods when such goods are materially less expensive to our taxpayers than those that can be procured domestically, such provisions could effect a deadly attrition of our whole international trade policy and bring about impairment of our relations with other nations.
It is my earnest hope that as soon as possible the Congress will repeal section 630 of the bill in its entirety.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: As enacted, H.R. 6042 is Public Law 157, 84th Congress (69 Stat. 301).
In response to the President's request, the Attorney General wrote an opinion as to the validity of certain provisions in section 638 of the act. In his letter of July 13, made public July 14, the Attorney General stated that "the proviso which purports to vest disapproval authority in either of the two Appropriations Committees is separable from the remainder of the Act and, if viewed as imposing an invalid condition, does not affect the validity of the remaining provisions."