Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 22, 1955

Letter to Prime Minister Maung Nu Concerning the Gift of the Burmese People.
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
I know that you will be personally interested in the arrangements I have made for the use of the generous gift from the people and Government of the Union of Burma which you entrusted to me during your recent visit.
As you requested, the money will be used for the benefit of the children of those members of the United States armed forces who lost their lives or were incapacitated in the Burma campaign. To that end, I have directed that the fund be assigned in three equal portions to the American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, and AMVETS. Each of these three prominent veterans organizations has been carrying on worthy programs of assistance to the children of veterans of the armed services of the United States. Each of them, under the terms of its charter, will be able to establish a separate fund to achieve the purpose you indicated. The gift of the Union of Burma will thus strengthen and help to perpetuate the beneficial activities of those organizations.
I wish again to express my appreciation and that of the people of the United States for this heart-warming expression of the close friendship and community of interests that exist between our two countries.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This letter was released at Geneva. The text of the Prime Minister's letter of June 29, 1955, which accompanied the gift, follows:
My dear Mr. President,
The people and Government of the Union of Burma remember with gratitude the valuable contribution made by the United States towards the liberation of their country from the Japanese militarist yoke. In particular they recall the heroic sacrifices made by the gallant members of the United States Armed Forces who took part in the liberation campaign.
As a token of our appreciation of the sacrifices made by these gallant men, I would ask you to accept this cheque for five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the money to be used in some appropriate manner for the benefit of the children of those who lost their lives or were incapacitated in the Burma campaign.
Yours sincerely,
MAUNG NU