Dwight D. Eisenhower
July 15, 1955

Message to the Congress Transmitting the Ninth Annual Report on United States Participation in the United Nations.
To the Congress of the United States:
I transmit herewith, pursuant to the United Nations Participation Act, the ninth annual report on United States participation in the United Nations, coveting the year 1954.

In a decade of trying years, the United Nations has developed from a blueprint for peace into a living, functioning organization. It was fitting that an impressive commemoration of the signing of the United Nations Charter ten years ago should have recently taken place in San Francisco to focus attention on the accomplishments and principles of the United Nations.
I was privileged to bring to this gathering a special message from the Congress expressing, on behalf of the people of the United States, our deep desire for peace and our hope that all nations will join with us in a renewed effort for peace.
Out of the United Nations' many actions in 1954, the following are of special interest to the United States, for they worked to the benefit of American foreign policy.
1. Atomic Energy for Peace:
The atom has unlocked untold opportunities in the world of peaceful progress. I know of no better way to improve the lot of mankind and raise its hopes than by pushing ahead vigorously in the development of the atom for the purpose of peace. That is why I went before the General Assembly in 1953 to ask that all nations apply their ingenuity and resourcefulness in a program of international cooperation in this field.
The faith of the American people in the world's readiness for this challenge have not been disappointed. The progress in a short space of time has been dramatic.
I authorized Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., to announce to the General Assembly in the fall of 1954 the intention of the United States to make available 100 kg. of fissionable material to assist nations in their own programs.
On December 4, 1954, the General Assembly adopted a resolution entitled "International Cooperation in Developing the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy." This was done with historic unanimity, after the rejection of Soviet amendments, 60 to 0.
By this resolution the Assembly endorse the establishment of an International Atomic Energy Agency to organize the pooling of atomic knowledge and materials for peaceful ends, and decreed the holding of an international technical conference under United Nations auspices to explore the promise of the atom and develop methods for its practical use. That conference--which may well be the broadest exchange of scientific and technical information in history--is to begin August 8 in Geneva.
United Nations' action in this field made the atoms-for-peace project into an instrument for constructive international progress. It reminded people the world over that the United States is their partner in their search for peace and plenty. It renewed also the hope for real participation by the Soviet Union--a hope which was central to the original proposal. We will welcome the participation of all interested nations in these activities. But we will not slow the wheels of progress if some do not choose to join with us.
2. Prisoners in Communist China:
Of all the important matters before the United Nations in 1954, none so strongly engaged the emotions of the American people as the case of the fighting men detained by the Chinese Communists. A historic 47-5 vote by the General Assembly condemned their detention and directed Secretary-General Hammarskjold to leave no stone unturned to seek their release.
The limited success reached thus far proves: the potency of the United Nations in focusing world opinion; the diplomatic skill and irrepressible perseverance of Mr. Hammarskjold in a most difficult task; the steady helpfulness of friendly nations whom divisive propaganda could not frighten away from us; and, by no. means least important, the patience and wise self-restraint of our own people. May these qualities serve to convince Communist China that it should end the wrongful detention of all surviving United Nations prisoners, whatever their nationality. The prolonged anguish of these men and their nearest kin arouses the sympathies of the civilized world.
3. Guatemala:
The conflict in Guatemala was closer to our homeland than any other which the Security Council has ever faced. In June 1954 Guatemalan patriots began an armed revolt to eject a government whose Communist sponsorship was becoming ever more obvious and to restore a free government.
Immediately the pro-Communist government invoked its right to be heard by the United Nations Security Council. The Council met forthwith. The Guatemalan representative demanded, with conspicuous Soviet backing, that the United Nations intervene to stop the revolt.
The United States Representative, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., insisted that the Soviet Union "stay out of this Hemisphere"--a restatement of the Monroe Doctrine in contemporary terms. Further, he urged the Council to let the proper regional body--the Organization of American States--deal with the situation in Guatemala and neighboring countries. He pointed out that if the United Nations were to intervene in local disputes over the heads of responsible regional organizations, the entire system of regional security sanctioned by the United Nations Charter would be in jeopardy.
Today Guatemala is again securely restored to the community of free nations. A challenge by world communism within our hemisphere has been met and overcome.
4. Disarmament and Security:
Neither lasting peace nor the real reduction of international tensions can be realized until progress in disarmament becomes a fact. As nuclear capabilities have increased to staggering proportions, disarmament has become, literally, a problem of survival for all mankind.
In 1954, a subcommittee of Canada, France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Soviet Union held its first round of private discussions. In five weeks of meetings newly detailed proposals were laid before the Soviet representative, but with no result.
But, in the General Assembly in September, the Soviets gave the appearance of reversing their adamant position and stated their acceptance of at least some principles of a sound program. We are carefully weighing this Soviet step, and the subsequent Soviet proposal in May 1955, in the broad restudy of United States disarmament policy which is now in progress.
By this continuing exploration in the disarmament field, as well as by recommendations for strengthening collective action against any future aggression, and by watchful influence over the dangerous areas of the world, the United Nations in 1954 continued to serve the cause of peace.
5. Economic and Social Actions:
The spectacular potentialities of the atom for peaceful purposes must not be allowed to overshadow the slow but sound progress of the United Nations in the economic and social field.
The most far-reaching new step in 1954 was the approval by the General Assembly of the establishment of an International Finance Corporation to stimulate the setting up and expansion of productive private enterprises in underdeveloped countries. The Corporation will be set up as an affiliate of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and will provide capital in private enterprises without requirement of government guarantees.
The work of the United Nations on behalf of refugees also received new impetus in a General Assembly decision authorizing the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to raise funds and undertake a four-year program designed to achieve permanent solutions for certain refugees in Europe, most of them still unsettled since World War II, who are not eligible for other aid programs. The United States strongly supported this decisive step to solve a distressing human problem.
We are able, in 1954, through the power of the United Nations in shaping world opinion, to further expose the repressive system of forced labor in Communist countries. The outstanding report of the United Nations Ad Hoc Committee on Forced Labor was officially considered for the first time by the Economic and Social Council, which subsequently condemned the use of forced labor for political and economic purposes. The United States Representative, Mrs. Oswald B. Lord, was also able to expose before the General Assembly newly discovered facts and recent regulations which demonstrated that the system of forced labor had been extended with Soviet help to Communist China.
Other economic and social programs of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies--including technical assistance, Korean reconstruction, aid to Palestine refugees, the Children's Fund, food and agricultural assistance, labor, health, and education-continued to help in making the United Nations known to millions of people around the globe as a living, constructive force. The United Nations Specialized Agencies, specifically the International Labor Organization and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, received the tribute of sudden participation by the U. S. S .R.
Whatever the reason for its changed attitude, we welcome it as further proof of the importance and world reputation of the Specialized Agencies; and also as an extension of points at which the Soviet rulers may--if they wish--broaden fruitful cooperation with the rest of the world. This development challenges the United States to maintain its watchfulness and constructive activity in all these fields in which the Soviet Union has at length shown an interest.
The United States representatives have actively used the United Nations' forum to expound our ideas and ideals and reveal the fallacies of communism.
All these things have happened after reduction in the previous year of our American share of United Nations costs and while we worked out a program in which all Americans holding important office at the United Nations were screened in accordance with FBI procedures.
These are highlights from one year's activity in the United Nations' search for peace among nations. That year is chronicled in more detail in the attached report.
The vitality of the United Nations and American support for the United Nations were never more needed than now. We are in a period of great flux in international affairs. There are signs that the world may be entering a new phase in international relationships. For the first time since the United Nations Charter came into force, the Heads of the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the U.S.S.R. will be meeting. They will, I hope, be able to identify the outstanding divisive issues and develop methods to try to solve them. I for one will enter these discussions with a full awareness of the opportunities offered by the United Nations to contribute to the peace of the world. If these meetings reach useful areas of agreement in the handling of international problems, then they will open new vistas looking toward further agreement. This can only mean that the United Nations will have new and wider opportunities to build upon the foundations thus laid.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
NOTE.: The report is published in House Document 166 (84th Cong., 1st sess.). In the third paragraph of the message the President referred to House Concurrent Resolution 157 (84th Cong., 1st sess. 69 Stat. B9).