Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 19, 1960

Remarks Upon Arrival at Kimpo International Airport in Seoul.
Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, officers and men of the armed services of Korea and of the United States, ladies and gentlemen:
First of all, Mr. Prime Minister, permit me to thank you most sincerely for your kind address of welcome to me and to my party.
For me and my party, as for all who love freedom, a visit here vividly recalls the memory of many months when Korea was a rallying place for the fighting men of the free world.
Here they came from every continent and hemisphere. Here, in their blood and valor, they proved that their devotion to freedom knew no boundary of land or of ocean. Here they demonstrated that a people determined to preserve their freedom against brutal aggression can depend on help, men and for arms and food--from all over the world.
I first came here only months after the Korean Republic was established. Six years later, in 1952, I saw the winter fighting in the mountains and felt the spirit and the will for sacrifice, and the courage out of which greatness in freedom is built.
This third time I come here to learn better and at first hand the progress you have made since war devastated your land; to discuss with the leaders of the Republic our common concerns and purposes; to help fortify and strengthen our mutual efforts in support of collective security, and to assure you that the United States, with all its heart, works for the noblest goal of mankind--peace and friendship in freedom.
I am proud to salute the men and women of Korea who have so amply proven their love of liberty, and I bring from the people of the United States their heartfelt wish for Korean growth and progress in the years ahead.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 4:05 p.m. He was greeted by Prime Minister and Mme. Huh Chung, other Korean Government officials, members of the diplomatic corps, Mayor Kee Young Chang, and U.S. Ambassador and Mrs. Walter P. McConaughy.