Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 01, 1955

Message to the Senate Transmitting the Austrian State Treaty.
To the Senate of the United States:
With a view to receiving the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification, I transmit herewith the State Treaty for the Re-Establishment of an Independent and Democratic Austria, signed at Vienna on May 15, 1955.

There is further transmitted for the information of the Senate the report made to me by the Secretary of State regarding the aforesaid Treaty.
The Austrian State Treaty represents the culmination of an effort by the Western Powers extending over a period of more than eight years to bring about Soviet agreement to grant Austria its freedom. The restoration of Austria's freedom and independence has been a major objective of United States policy since the pledge of Austrian liberation made by the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and France in the Moscow Declaration of November 1, 1943. Until last April, the Soviet Union, while professing a desire for Austrian independence, by its actions and policies blocked the redemption of that pledge. The reversal in policy by the Soviet Government following its failure to prevent ratification of the Paris Pacts has now permitted the conclusion of an Austrian treaty and has won for freedom another important triumph. Moreover, it has emphasized clearly the significance of Western unity to the future of free men in every part of the world.
The Treaty provides for the termination of the occupation and the reestablishment of Austria, within the borders as they existed on January 1, 1938, as a sovereign, independent and democratic state. All occupation forces will be withdrawn within ninety days of the coming into force of the Treaty, and so far as possible not later than December 31, 1955.
After seventeen years of occupation, the Austrian Government and people are naturally anxious that ratification of the Treaty may be effected as quickly as possible. The pledge of the Moscow Declaration will have been fulfilled only upon entry into force of the Treaty and the consequent withdrawal of foreign occupation troops from Austria. I urge, therefore, that the Senate take early and favorable action with respect to the Austrian State Treaty.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The text of the treaty and the report of the Secretary of State are published in Senate Executive G (84th Cong., 1st sess.).