Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 28, 1954

Joint Statement by the President and Prime Minister Churchill.
IN THESE FEW DAYS of friendly and fruitful conversations, we have considered various subjects of mutual and world interest.
I. WESTERN EUROPE
We are agreed that the German Federal Republic should take its place as an equal partner in the community of Western nations, where it can make its proper contribution to the defense of the free world. We are determined to achieve this goal, convinced that the Bonn and Paris Treaties provide the best way. We welcome the recent statement by the French Prime Minister that an end must be put to the present uncertainties.
The European Defense Community Treaty has been ratified by four of the six signatory nations, after exhaustive debates over a period of more than two years. Naturally these nations are unwilling to disregard their previous legislative approvals or to reopen these complex questions.
In connection with these treaties, the United States and the United Kingdom have given important assurances, including the disposition of their armed forces in Europe, in order to demonstrate their confidence in the North Atlantic Community and in the EDC and the Bonn Treaties.
It is our conviction that further delay in the entry into force of the EDC and Bonn Treaties would damage the solidarity of the Atlantic nations.
We wish to reaffirm that the program for European unity inspired by France, of which the EDC is only one element, so promising to peace and prosperity in Europe, continues to have our firm support.
II. SOUTHEAST ASIA
We discussed Southeast Asia and, in particular, examined the situation which would arise from the conclusion of an agreement on Indochina. We also considered the situation which would follow from failure to reach such an agreement.
We will press forward with plans for collective defense to meet either eventuality.
We are both convinced that if at Geneva the French Government is confronted with demands which prevent an acceptable agreement regarding Indochina, the international situation will be seriously aggravated.
III. ATOMIC MATTERS
We also discussed technical cooperation on atomic energy. We agreed that both our countries would benefit from such cooperation to the fullest extent allowed by U.S. Legislation.
IV.
In addition to these specific matters, we discussed the basic principles underlying the policy of our two countries. An agreed declaration setting forth certain of these will be made available tomorrow.