Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 20, 1960

Remarks at the Headquarters of the Korean Army's Sixth Corps.
Mr. Prime Minister, General Yu, General Magruder, distinguished guests, members of the United Nations Command, ladies and gentlemen:
Fighting men from the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Turkey, the Kingdom of Thailand, the United Kingdom, Ethiopia, and the United States are formed here on this field. In the reviewing stand are officers and men representing Australia, Canada, France, Greece, New Zealand. The parade field is flanked, I note, by the flags of the 16 nations which served the United Nations cause here during the Korean conflict. Through those of the "16" who are represented here today, as well as those who are not, I pay tribute to the contribution and sacrifice of their people and fighting men in the Korean war.
And taking the privilege of a fellow citizen, in my case, I cannot fail to observe with pride the men in American uniforms in the ranks before me. Our countrymen in the United States join me in a prideful salute to you who represent us in this land that lies along the frontier of freedom.
But in particular, I pay a special tribute to the Armed forces of the Republic of Korea. No one can forget the fortitude and bravery of the Korean Army when, almost 10 years ago this very day, it went into action against Communist aggression from the north. The utmost of self-sacrifice was manifested by the Korean soldiers, and the sailors, and their airmen defending these rugged hills that surround us, sparkling today in their summer beauty, bleak and forbidding in the cold winter months.
This heroism is fittingly commemorated by the Unknown Soldier's monument where a few minutes ago I was privileged to place a wreath. All of us--soldiers and civilians alike--from all these 16 nations, salute the soldier who lies there. He, like countless thousands of others, gave his life not only in the defense of free Korea but in the defense of freedom for all people everywhere.
Note: The President spoke at 6:50 p.m. In his opening words he referred to Prime Minister Huh Chung, Lt. Gen. Yu Jai Heung, Commanding General, first Army of the Republic of Korea, and Gen. Carter B. Magruder, Commander in Chief, United Nations Command.