Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 12, 1960

Letter to Governor Underwood of West Virginia on further federal Activities in Aid of Chronic Labor Surplus Areas.
[ Released June 12, 1960. Dated June 9, 1960 ]
Dear Governor Underwood:
Following my meeting with you and Senators Scott and Cooper on May fourth, I called together the appropriate officials in those federal agencies having programs affecting chronic labor surplus areas, to again review pertinent activities within their province. As a result of this meeting a number of additional executive actions have been taken to further assist these areas. Knowing of your deep interest in this matter, I thought you would like to have a copy of a report to me which outlines these new actions.
May I take this occasion to also call to your attention the fact that bills have been introduced, both in the House and the Senate, designed to implement the suggestions which I made when I vetoed S. 722. In my opinion, the revised legislation which has been submitted on behalf of the Administration represents a sound and forthright program for assisting the states and localities in dealing with the problems of chronic unemployment. I am disturbed that hearings on this legislation have not been scheduled. It had been--and is--my hope that suitable legislation would be enacted at this session of the Congress.
In any event, we will continue to take every possible administrative action we can to assist chronic labor surplus areas in West Virginia and elsewhere.
With warm regard,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The report to which the President referred was in the form of a letter dated May 31, 1960, from Under Secretary of Commerce Philip A. Ray, Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee To Coordinate Federal Urban Area Assistance Programs (see Item 5). The report, released with the President's letter, described additional Government action with special reference to Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia.
For veto of the area redevelopment bill (S. 722), see Item 146.