Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 20, 1958

Joint Statement following Discussions With the President of the Philippines.
[ Released June 20, 1958. Signed June 19, 1958 ]
THE PRESIDENT of the United States and the President of the Republic of the Philippines today concluded the valuable discussions they have held over the past few days on matters of interest to both countries. These talks centered chiefly on United States-Philippines relations, but they also included an exchange of views on matters of international significance to both countries with special emphasis on Asia.
During his three-day visit President Garcia addressed a Joint Meeting of both houses of the Congress, and he and members of his Party conferred with the Vice President, the Secretary of State, individual Members of Congress, and other United States Government officials. After leaving Washington President Garcia will visit other parts of the United States and will meet governmental, cultural, and business leaders.
I.
The two Presidents reviewed the long history of friendship and cooperation between their countries and they expressed confidence that their respective peoples will continue to benefit from-this close association in the future. Moreover, they recognized that similar cooperation among the nations of the free World had been effective in recent years in preventing overt aggression in the far East and elsewhere in the world. The two Presidents pledged themselves to maintain the unity of strength and purpose between their countries and the other countries of the Western Pacific in order to meet any threats to peace and security that may arise.
The two Presidents reaffirmed their adherence to the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter. They recognized that through dedication to that Charter the nations of the world can progress toward the attainment of the universal ideal of peace with justice based on the dignity of the individual. With this objective they will continue to support and encourage the activities of the United Nations organization.
They noted that great progress has been achieved under SEATO in the strengthening of the free World's defenses against communist imperialism in Southeast Asia. They concurred that in the light of the continued threat of communist military power in Asia, SEATO's defensive capability must be carefully maintained. Toward this end the United States will continue to assist in the development of the Armed forces of the Philippines, in accordance with mutual security programs jointly approved with the Republic of the Philippines.
They reviewed, in this connection, the important role played by the Mutual Defense Pact between the Philippines and the United States. They agreed that the aggressive intentions and activities of communism in the far East and in Southeast Asia render the maintenance and strengthening of these defensive arrangements an absolute necessity. President Eisenhower made clear that, in accordance with these existing alliances and the deployments and dispositions thereunder, any armed attack against the Philippines would involve an attack against United States forces stationed there and against the United States and would instantly be repelled.
In the spirit of these alliances, and with particular reference to the problems affecting the military bases operated by the United States in the Philippines, they expressed mutual confidence that these questions would be resolved to the satisfaction of the two countries, having regard to the principle of sovereign equality and the vital requirements of an effective common defense.
II.
The two Presidents reviewed progress toward economic development made in the Philippines over the past several years and examined the current economic problems with which that nation is faced. Economic discussions were also held between Philippine officials and representatives of the State and Treasury Departments, the Export-Import Bank and the International Cooperation Administration. The Philippine officials outlined a long-term program for economic development. In view of the inability of the United States to anticipate accurately financial availabilities and relative requirements beyond the next twelve months, immediate emphasis was placed on meeting the initial requirements of the Philippine program.
For these initial requirements the Export-Import Bank informed the Philippine Government that it will establish a new line of credit of $75 million for financing private and public development projects in the Philippines.
The Philippine Government was also informed that, subject to Congressional action on the additional appropriations being requested, the Development Loan fund would examine specific projects submitted to it to determine whether they would merit Development Loan fund financing in an amount not to exceed $50 million.
III.
In the course of their talks, the two Presidents were deeply aware of the special significance of their meeting as the Heads of State of two countries, one of which through the evolutionary process and by mutual agreement obtained its independence from the other. They realized that, in the context of present events, their meeting would provide a valuable object lesson on the relations of mutual respect and equal justice most appropriate to two countries, great or small, which share a common faith in freedom and democracy.
IV.
President Eisenhower and President Garcia concluded that the understandings reached, as well as the personal relationships established during this visit, will contribute significantly to the mutual good will and friendship which traditionally support Philippines-United States relations.

C. P. GARGIA
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER