Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 10, 1958

Remarks on Introducing Prime Minister Macmillan at the Johns Hopkins University Commencement
Dr. Eisenhower, Mr. Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen:
To the trustees, faculties and administrators of the Johns Hopkins University, I express my profound thanks for the honor you have just done me.
This is for me an especially happy and memorable occasion.
My relationship to the president of your university gives me reason enough for my gratification. Though all of us have long known of the brilliant reputation of Johns Hopkins University, my brother has told me much more.
I salute you for your untiring efforts to maintain a university truly national in scope. It is dedicated to setting standards of excellence in scholarship and research up to the highest Creative levels of the mind. Your success cannot help but have a beneficial influence on all of American education, and indeed upon the nation and the world.
My enjoyment of this day is heightened by the presence of Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, who was, for a period in World War II my close associate and adviser, and ever since my warm friend. Today I count myself fortunate that he is my fellow worker in the cause of international understanding and a just world peace.
I applaud you for including, among the few who have received honorary degrees from Johns Hopkins one who combines such qualities of leadership, world statesmanship, and intellectual distinction as does the Prime Minister.
But my deepest pleasure lies in the privilege I am personally accorded, that of presenting this great free world leader to you. Mr. Macmillan is respected and admired in all the countries of the world that are freely permitted to know the facts of today's world and personalities. Even in those countries beyond the forbidding walls of censorship, where freedom is out of reach of the people, he is recognized as a man of integrity, courage and foresight, who devotes his life to working for peace with justice.
So it is with a deep sense of personal distinction that I present him to you.
Ladies and gentlemen--the Prime Minister of Great Britain, The Right Honorable Harold Macmillan.
Note: The President spoke immediately after receiving an honorary degree from the University. His opening words referred to Dr. Milton S. Eisenhower, President of the University.