Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 23, 1958

Remarks to a Group of Junior Red Cross Delegates.
THE LONG-TERM BENEFIT of learning one foreign language fluently is something that I believe is as valuable as any one other single accomplishment that you can attain. I never learned to be fluent in any language, yet I studied Latin, German, french and Spanish. The reason, apparently, was that as far as my instructors were concerned, they failed to concentrate their shots instead of using a shot-gun on me. I simply did not have the linguistic kind of ability, and so therefore there was confusion created.
I do believe this: once you learn one other language well, then you have a very great stepping-stone for another. I know one man that talks fluently in six, and he has taught himself. And he knows the culture of the country of the language that he has learned. He has learned its history. He has been my guide around such places as Rome and Lisbon, and so on, because of his interest in this matter. And the good he does because he can communicate in that fashion is really great.
I did not mean to get so quickly off of the humanitarian interests that attract all of you youngsters. It is a very splendid omen for the benefit of all humanity. I cannot believe that Europe will not--or any of the cities of Europe that you visit--fail to enthuse and to thrill about your presence, when they know what your mission is: to understand others better, to help them in need--wherever they are in need, through the medium of the Red Cross.
I think you are going out as a group of--almost as missionaries-crusaders, to do something that makes the old world just a little bit better.
I have heard about the competitions through which you have gone to win your places. I congratulate each one of you for the capacity for understanding and learning that you have shown and for the purity of your dedication--to help.
I see the buttons that you wear to say Hello, and which give your names, and ask what's mine. I should have told you. But I probably made the unwarranted assumption that you knew.
As you go, I want to assure you that I send with you my very best wishes. Here and there, I think you will run into some old friends of mine. I have been around Europe a lot, as your Red Cross President, General Gruenther, has. And when you run into friends of mine, please stop and talk with him and tell him that I send greetings by you to him.
And when you come back, I am quite sure that your satisfaction in your work here will be enhanced because of your knowledge and the understanding acquired over there.

Good luck to all of you--good to see you--goodbye.
Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden.