Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 14, 1960

Remarks Upon Arrival at the International Airport in Manila.
Mr. President and my fiends of the Philippine Islands:
This is indeed for me a homecoming. As I circled over your city, I saw the old familiar sights of the Laguna de Bay, the Baguio Mountains and the Pasig River, and finally this lovely coastline along which your city lies. Indeed these sights aroused in me sentiments and emotions that no eloquence of mine could ever adequately express.
I worked among you for more than 4 years. I came here as an assistant of General Douglas MacArthur, and only yesterday morning, or possibly--my days are getting mixed up--2 days ago, I called General MacArthur and had a conversation with him about these Islands, and this section of the world that he knew so well, and he asked me to convey to you his sincere conviction--strengthened with the years--that always there will be unity between the Philippines and the United States of America. And he asked me to convey to you, Mr. President, and to your people, his warmest greetings and his best wishes for your continued welfare.
The last time that I was enabled to come to see your country, was just after the conclusion of World War II. I then saw a city wrecked and living in destruction--everything torn to pieces. As I flew down over the city today, I saw what Philippine courage, Philippine energy, Philippine endurance and stamina could accomplish.
Manila is as beautiful as ever it was before--and more so. All over your country the ravages of war have been repaired, by your refusal to surrender to despair or to lose faith in your own destiny.
As I looked at these familiar sights, there was one thing, of course, that was missing: so many of my old friends of the years just preceding World War II--they are gone. So many of them paid the price that free men have been called upon to pay again and again for the defense of freedom, for the right of living as human people of dignity, to stand straight under their God, and bow the knee to no one else.
I pay tribute to those great heroes, and to all who fought with them and beside them--both American and Filipino, I hope in a symbolic way to pay my respects when I go to some of the cemeteries where they are buried.
But to you the living, and among you are many of my old friends, I affirm again the determination of the United States to live with you as a true partner in defense of those ideals of liberty and human dignity in which we alike believe.
Between us, just as always it has been the case between members of a family, are some problems to be discussed and to be talked about and to negotiate. But that negotiation and those conferences take place in a spirit of common dedication to ideals that make us true partners. Therefore, no petty differences of any kind can ever tear apart these two great countries, which are certain together to march down the lane of the future--free, proud, prospering, and always friends.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 5 p.m. He was met by President Carlos P. Garcia, officials of the Philippine Government, members of the diplomatic corps, and U.S. Ambassador John D. Hickerson.