Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 07, 1956

Proclamation 3139—Determining Piperidyl Methadone and Five Other Drugs to be Opiates

Whereassection 4731 (g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 provides in part as follows:
Opiate. The word "opiate", as used in this part shall mean any drug (as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; 52 Stat. 1041, section 201 (g); 21 U.S.C. 321) found by the Secretary or his delegate, after due notice and opportunity for public hearing, to have an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine or cocaine, and proclaimed by the President to have been so found by the Secretary or his delegate. * * *;
ANDWhereasthe Secretary of the Treasury, after due notice and opportunity for public hearing, has found that each of the following-named drugs has an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine, and that in the public interest this finding should be effective immediately:
(1) 4,4-dipheny1-6-piperidino-3-heptanone (piperidyl methadone).
(2) Isopropyl 1-methyl-4-phenylpiperldine-4-carboxylate.
(3) 3-diethylamino-1,1-di(2-thienyl)-1-butene (diethylthiambutene).
(4) 1,3-dimethy1-4-pheny1-4-propionoxyhexamethyleneimine.
(5) Ethyl 2,2-diphenyl-4-morpholinobuty-rate.
(6) Ethyl 1-[2-(p-aminophenyl)-ethyl 1-4-phenylpiperidine-4-carboxylate.
Now, Therefore, I, Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, do hereby proclaim that the Secretary of the Treasury has found that each of the aforementioned drugs has an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine and that in the public interest this finding should be effective immediately.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this seventh day of June in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eightieth.


DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
By the President:

JOHN FOSTER DULLES,

Secretary of State