Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 20, 1960

Joint Statement following Discussions With Prime Minister Huh Chung.
ACCEPTING an invitation of long standing from the Government of the Republic of Korea, President Eisenhower today visited Korea where he met with Prime Minister Huh Chung and other Korean leaders, including members of the Korean National Assembly, which he addressed. President Eisenhower also visited the United Nations Command and reviewed contingents representing United Nations forces which are helping to defend this key free World position.
President Eisenhower's visit highlighted the vital purposes served by collective free World action to preserve peace initiated almost exactly ten years ago in response to international communism's attack on the Republic of Korea. The manner in which the United Nations responded in June, 1950 to aggression and the retention over the past decade of a strong free World position in the Republic of Korea have been major factors in preserving the peace in Asia and creating a climate in which free Asia nations can enjoy independence, promote human rights and improve the spiritual and material welfare of these people.
The visit impressively reaffirmed the strong bonds of friendship and close cooperation between the Republic of Korea and the United States. The visit also provided an opportunity for discussions between Prime Minister Huh Chung and President Eisenhower on questions of common concern to their two countries. President Eisenhower reaffirmed the assurance of the Government and people of the United States of their continued support for the Republic of Korea and their solemn pledge to preserve the independence of Korea.
The two leaders gave unqualified endorsement to the principles of the United Nations Charter as standards for international behavior. They pledged that their countries would continue to uphold United Nations principles and work unreservedly and unceasingly toward maintaining peace. To this end. both leaders recognized the vital importance of preserving the alliance between the Republic of Korea and the United States of America and of maintaining vigilance and strength, patience and foresightedness, in carrying out the purposes for which this alliance stands.
In the course of the discussions, Prime Minister Huh Chung and President Eisenhower took cognizance of the deep longing of the Korean people for reunification of their homeland. They agreed that every effort must be continued to bring a peaceful end to this tragic division in accordance with the principles set forth in United Nations resolutions, envisaging the achievement by peaceful means of a unified, independent and democratic Korea under a representative form of government and full restoration of peace and security in the area.
Prime Minister Huh Chung outlined measures being taken by his country to broaden its international ties and he affirmed his nation's strong desire to be a full member of the United Nations. Prime Minister Huh Chung and President Eisenhower agreed that the Republic of Korea is entitled to United Nations membership and that its membership would strengthen the United Nations.
Prime Minister Huh Chung and President Eisenhower agreed that efforts should be made to encourage private investment and increase the flow of trade between countries of the free World.
Prime Minister Huh Chung and President Eisenhower examined Korean and American economic and social programs and agreed that they should be designed and executed so as to foster economic independence, assist social progress, and provide a strong foundation for democratic institutions. Both leaders agreed that continued United States economic assistance is required to help the Republic of Korea maintain economic growth and achieve economic viability as soon as possible.
Prime Minister Huh Chung and President Eisenhower expressed their resolve to continue to serve the cause of peace and strengthen the bonds of friendship between their two peoples.
Note: The joint statement was released in Seoul.