Dwight D. Eisenhower
June 30, 1957

Remarks in Connection With the Opening of the International Geophysical Year
[Recorded on film and tape]
JULY FIRST marks the beginning of one of the great scientific adventures of our time--the International Geophysical Year.
During this period, which will actually be 18 months long, the scientists of the United States will join their efforts with those of the scientists of some sixty other nations to make the most intensive study ever undertaken of our planet.
All over the world elaborate preparations for this event have been under way for the last five years. You have been reading in the daily press of the expeditions to the Antarctic which have been paving the way for a concentrated study by some 12 nations of the last unknown Continent. Two years ago, it was announced that the United States would launch an earth-circling satellite during the International Geophysical Year in order to obtain information about the Sun and the Earth's environment from outside the barrier of the Earth's atmosphere. During the years of preparation meteorological and other observing stations all over the globe have been readied. Hundreds of new stations have been established in order that many types of geophysical phenomena might be viewed and measured from every possible vantage point.
The scientists tell us that they cannot possibly anticipate all of the valuable scientific knowledge that will result from their efforts. They believe that many of the facts thus acquired will give us new understanding and new power over the forces of nature.
As I see it, however, the most important result of the International Geophysical Year is the demonstration of the ability of peoples of all nations to work together harmoniously for the common good. I hope this can become common practice in other fields of human endeavor.
The United States is proud to have a part in this great scientific undertaking.
I should like to congratulate all who have helped to make our program possible and particularly the National Academy of Sciences. Through its National Committee for the International Geophysical Year the Academy has worked tirelessly to plan and coordinate the program, in cooperation with other nations.
I extend congratulations also to the international body whose vision and imagination have not only made the project possible, but have woven all the multiple strands together. That body is the International Council of Scientific Unions, representing the major scientific bodies of the world. Through its Special Committee for the International Geophysical Year, the Council has provided brilliant leadership for this enterprise.
We wish the scientists of all nations Godspeed and good luck as the International Geophysical Year begins.