Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 07, 1955

Remarks to Distinguished Service Cross Recipients and Commanders Who Participated in the Seizure of the Remagen Bridge.
Gentlemen:
I have asked you to come in here this morning because you know old soldiers' minds are bound to turn back once in a while to dramatic events of war--particularly of the kind that took place at the Remagen bridgehead.
Now, of course, that was not the biggest battle that ever was, but for me it always typified one thing: the dash, the ingenuity, the readiness at the first opportunity that characterizes the American soldier.
You men are only a typical group of the great forces that were in Europe, but it did seem to me that here, on the 10th anniversary of the day you went across the Rhine, you might not mind coming in and saying hello to the man who was responsible for directing this whole overall strategy.
I also brought with me General Spaatz. He typified the unity between the ground-air team on the battlefield that was responsible for victory.
Now I must confess to you that I have done something on my own responsibility. I have organized here the Society of the Remagen Bridgehead. I have prepared for each of you a little certificate which I hope you will keep and retain as of some sentimental value. It is nothing except to say in my little way to you, and through you to all of the 9th Armored Division--and all of the whole Army, Navy, and Air Force behind you that was responsible for this thing--my own personal thanks.
Incidentally, one of these certificates is made out to all the officers and men of the 9th Armored Division, and General Leonard says he is going to send it down to Fort Knox as a memento.
Note: The President spoke in the Cabinet Room at 9:30 a.m. Gen. Carl Spaatz and Lt. Gen. John W. Leonard, to whom he referred, participated in the seizure of the bridge, General Spaatz as Commanding General of the U.S. Strategic Air Force in Europe, and General Leonard as Commanding General of the 9th Armored Division.