Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 03, 1955

Letter to His Majesty Bao Dai, Chief of State of Viet-Nam.
[Released March 3, 1955. Dated February 19, 1955]
Your Majesty:
It might be of interest to you to learn firsthand of General Collins' report to me and of our present views and policies concerning Viet-Nam. General Collins has just left to return to Saigon after a short period of consultations in Washington. have discussed developments in Viet-Nam with him at some length. He has also talked with the Secretary of State and with our Congressional leaders.
It is gratifying to learn from him of the distinct progress that is being made in Viet-Nam by Prime Minister Diem and the Government of Viet-Nam. General Collins believes that there is a good chance that Viet-Nam can remain free if there is continued effective action on the Government's programs. The Prime Minister's announced programs of land reform and reorganization of the Armed Forces should, when fully carried out, further increase the stability and unity of the Government.
The Government of the United States is vigorously opposed to the forces of world Communism. We continue to support those aspirations of the people of Asia for independence, peace and prosperity. Accordingly, I have concurred in General Collins' recommendation to continue and expand support for Free Viet-Nam.
It is encouraging to me to know that Prime Minister Diem is making substantial progress. The United States Government intends to continue its support of his Government.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Gen. J. Lawton Collins acted as the President's special representative in Viet-Nam from November 2, 1954, to May 14, 1955.
On May 10 a White House release stated that during General Collins' special mission, which had been extended at the request of Prime Minister Diem, he had assisted the Vietnamese Government in the preparation and implementation of its economic, military, and social programs for the strengthening of Free Vietnam. The release added that General Collins had successfully concluded arrangements under which the United States, at the request of the Government of Viet-Nam and with the agreement of the Government of France, had undertaken responsibility for the training of Vietnam national armed forces.