Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 06, 1957

Message to the People of Ghana on the Occasion of Its Independence
ON BEHALF OF the people of the United States of America, I wish to extend to the Government and people of Ghana, congratulations on the occasion of your joining the family of independent nations. We have watched with particular admiration the manner in which you have attained your independence, for it shows the good fruit of statesman-like cooperative effort between the Government and people of Ghana and the Government and people of the United Kingdom. I am sure that this same spirit will characterize Ghana's relationship with the free world, including the great and voluntary association of nations, the British Commonwealth.
In extending these good wishes, I speak for a people that cherishes independence, which we deeply believe is the right of all people who are able to discharge its responsibilities. It is with special pleasure, therefore, that we witness the establishment of your new nation and the assumption of its sovereign place in the free world.
In sending you these greetings, I am conscious of the many years of friendship which have characterized the relations between our two countries. We are proud that some of your distinguished leaders have been educated in the United States. We are also proud that many of our most accomplished citizens had their ancestry in your country. We are pleased that trade between our two countries has developed to the benefit of both countries. But most importantly, we revere in common with you the great and eternal principles which characterize the free democratic way of life. I am confident that our two countries will stand as one in safeguarding this greatest of all bonds between us.
Note: This message from the President was prepared for use in connection with a special United States Information Agency radio program entitled "Salute to Ghana." The program was broadcast on March 6, 1957, the date on which Ghana became independent.