Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 06, 1957

Exchange of Messages Between the President and the Prime Minister of Ghana on the Occasion of Its Independence.
[ Dated March 6, 1957. Released June 8, 1957 ]
His Excellency

Kwame Nkrumah

Prime Minister of Ghana
It is with warm pleasure that I extend in my own name and on behalf of the American people most cordial greetings and felicitations to you and your countrymen upon the occasion of the independence of Ghana. This event is a cause of pride and satisfaction to the United States as it must be to all free nations. Ghana, which has demonstrated its devotion to peace and the maintenance of democratic political institutions and its dedication to the social and economic advancement of its people, is a welcome addition to the family of nations.
The Government of the United States looks forward to close and friendly relations with the Government of Ghana and to an early exchange of Ambassadors.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This message was cabled to Accra, Ghana, for delivery to Prime Minister Nkrumah on March 6 by Vice President Nixon. The message was released on June 8, at which time the Prime Minister's reply, dated April 27, was also made public. The text of the reply follows:
Dear Mr. President:
It gives me great pleasure to be able to reply to your message of good wishes which you kindly sent to me through Vice President Richard Nixon on Ghana's attainment of independence.
I would like to record our great joy at the manner in which the Government and people of the United States of America received the news of Ghana's independence and in which they made their pleasure known. We would like to reciprocate this spontaneous demonstration of friendship by assuring you of our friendship and good-will now and for the future.
We are confident that the bonds which unite our two countries will always be strengthened by our common insistence on the principles of democracy, freedom and justice, by the constant stream of men and women who leave this country to study in the United States, and by our desire to promote trade between our two countries.
May I avail myself of the opportunity, to wish you, Sir, long life and all success.
Yours sincerely,
KWAME NKRUMAH
Prime Minister