Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 04, 1955

Statement by the President Concerning Offer of Food Supplies to Albania.
I HAVE ASKED the League of Red Cross Societies to convey to the appropriate authorities of Albania the desire of the American people to contribute from their food supplies to help alleviate the current food shortage in Albania.
The distribution of this food would be under the supervision of the League of Red Cross Societies which has had broad experience in the administration of relief. Recently it administered a flood relief program to persons in six European countries who were victims of last summer's floods. Feed grain and food were distributed to needy people in these countries regardless of race, color, creed, or political convictions.
It is well known that for some years Albania has not produced enough food to support its population. The resulting shortage of food becomes particularly acute during the late winter and early spring. The present offer is intended to assist in relieving the situation during this critical period.
The friendship between the people of the United States and the people of Albania has been long-standing. Over the years, numerous Albanians have come to this country--many to remain as citizens with bonds of kinship and concern for their fatherland, many others to return and resettle throughout Albania carrying with them warm associations with the United States. Since the early part of this century, American interest in the Albanian people has expressed itself in many public and private actions for their welfare and their relief in times of special stress. I hope that the present offer will be accepted as another manifestation of the interest of the people of the United States in the welfare of the Albanian people.
Note: On March 8 a White House release stated that the President regretted that the offer of American food supplies to Albania had been rejected. The release further stated that the administration felt sure that if the Albanian people had been able to express themselves, the offer would have been accepted in the spirit in which it was made.