Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 18, 1954

Citation Accompanying Medal of Honor Presented to Ola L. Mize.
THE PRESIDENT of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress March 3, 1863 has awarded in the name of The Congress the Medal of Honor to
SERGEANT FIRST CLASS (THEN SERGEANT)

OLA L. MIZE, USA
for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty in action with the enemy:
Sergeant Mize, Infantry, United States Army, a member of Company K, 15th Infantry Regiment, 3d Infantry Division, distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and outstanding courage above and beyond the call of duty in action against the enemy near Surang-ni, Korea, on 10-11 June 1953. Company K was defending "Outpost Harry," a strategically valuable position, when the enemy launched a heavy attack. Learning that a wounded comrade lay helpless at a friendly listening post, Sergeant Mize with a medical aid man moved through intense enemy fire and rescued him. On returning to his position Sergeant Mize organized an effective defense and inflicted heavy casualties against the continuously and fiercely attacking enemy. During this period he was knocked down three times by the concussion of artillery and grenade blasts but each time he dauntlessly arose and resumed the violent combat. When enemy onslaughts ceased temporarily with the enemy in possession of friendly emplacements in the outpost area, he led his few remaining men from bunker to bunker, firing into the apertures, throwing grenades at the entrenched foe, and effectively neutralizing their positions. When an enemy soldier suddenly stepped from cover prepared to fire at one of Sergeant Mize's men, Sergeant Mize killed him saving the life of his fellow-soldier. After rejoining the platoon, he observed that a friendly machine gun had been overrun. Unhesitatingly, he fought his way to the position, single-handedly killing ten of the enemy and dispersing the remainder. Fighting his way back to his command post he took a position to protect several wounded soldiers. Later, securing a radio, he directed friendly artillery fire upon the attacking enemy's routes of approach and at dawn he helped regroup for a counterattack which drove the enemy from the outpost. Sergeant Mize's valorous conduct and unflinching courage reflect lasting glory upon himself and uphold the noble traditions of the military service.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The President presented the medal to Sergeant Mize at Lowry Air Force Base at 11:30 a.m. on September 7, 1954, in the presence of relatives and friends.