Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 03, 1959

Letter to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives Proposing Establishment of a Special Commission on Telecommunications.
Dear___________:
The telecommunication systems of the United States are essential to the national security, to the satiety of life and property, to international relations, to a better-informed public, and to the business, social, educational, religious and political life of the country. They are one of the Nation's most valuable assets.
Changing technology along with changing needs in Government and non-Government areas present problems in the telecommunication field which require searching examination. The situation is becoming no less complicated by prospective developments in satellites and space vehicles, as well as in defense weapons systems.
The Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, on my behalf, convened a Special Advisory Committee on Telecommunication November 18, 1958, to review the role of the Federal Government in the management of telecommunications. The report of that Committee is now under study within the Administration.
It was not possible for the Special Advisory Committee during its brief existence to undertake a thorough and comprehensive study of the Government's role or to make detailed studies of such problems as radio frequency usage.
In order that such a study can be made, I recommend that the Congress establish a Special Commission on Telecommunications, to be composed of five members appointed by the President.
I have asked the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization to transmit to you a draft of suggested legislation to carry out this recommendation, and to convey to you the details involved in the suggested studies, as recommended in the report of the Special Advisory Committee.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This is the text of identical letters addressed to the Honorable Richard M. Nixon, President of the Senate, and to the Honorable Sam Rayburn, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The report of the Special Advisory Committee on Telecommunications, dated December 29, 1958 (31 pp., mimeographed), was released by the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization.
The draft bill transmitted to the Congress by the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization was incorporated in H.J. Res. 331 and S.J. Res. 76.