Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 20, 1954

Statement by the President Upon Approving Recommendations for the Development of the Upper Colorado River Basin.
I HAVE TODAY approved recommendations for the development of the Upper Colorado River Basin.
The general plan upon which these recommendations are based has been prepared by the Secretary of the Interior. The Secretary's recommendations have been reviewed by the Bureau of the Budget. Legislation embodying the Administration's recommendations is being prepared for introduction in the Congress.
This is a comprehensive, well-planned development of a river basin. The close Federal-State cooperation upon which the Secretary's plan is based also carries out this Administration's approach to water resource development.
The development will conserve water, enabling the region to increase supplies for municipal uses, industrial development, and irrigation. It will develop much-needed electric power.
The development calls for sound financing. The legislation now being drafted will set up a fund for the entire project so that it will be constructed and paid for as a basin program.
Construction of the Echo Park and Glen Canyon dams, two of the large projects in the basin plan, is recommended. These dams are key units strategically located to provide the necessary storage of water to make the plan work at its maximum efficiency.
The legislation being drafted will authorize a number of projects which will put to use the waters of the Upper Colorado. This authorization will become effective following further consideration by the Secretary of the Interior, with the assistance of the Secretary of Agriculture, of the relation of these projects to the wise use and sound development of the basin.
I am deferring my recommendation on the Shiprock unit of the Navajo project until the Secretary has completed his study.
I hope the Congress will give early consideration to enactment of the Administration's legislative proposal. I firmly believe development of the Upper Colorado River Basin, in accordance with its provisions, is in the national interest.
Note: The recommendations approved by the President, together with related papers, are printed in Senate Report 1983 (83d Cong., 2d sess.).