Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 24, 1959

Toasts of the President and King Hussein I of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Your Majesty, Distinguished and Honored Guests from your country, and Friends:

It is truly an honor and a privilege to welcome to this country, on behalf of the American people, King Hussein of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
He has been admired as the head of his nation, but he has also been so courageous that his name has become symbolic of courage in the world.
Since the American people, Your Majesty, honor and admire courage as much as any other quality, they have for you a real feeling of friendliness and admiration. They recognize what the leaders of your country, headed by yourself, have been able to do in the face of very great trials and pressures. You have withstood the temptations that have been placed before you to weaken in defense of your principles and your rights.
So I am sure this company would like to give a salute to you in a toast to your health and happiness and prosperity.

Gentlemen, His Majesty the King
Note: The President proposed this toast at a luncheon at the White House. King Hussein responded as follows:
Mr. President, gentlemen:
I should like to thank you very much indeed for your kind words. I should like to thank you for giving me the opportunity today, despite your engagements, to have the pleasure to spend this time with you and the gentlemen present here.
It has always been one of my dearest wishes to be able to visit this great country, and to personally thank you, Mr. President, for all the help and encouragement you have given me during a time of great difficulty in which I, and the country I am privileged to serve, have had to pass. I always remember our friends and remember the difficulties we faced. I am very happy that we have managed to pass through that difficult stage, and that I now have this opportunity to come here to thank you, and to spend a period of time with you, which has been most pleasant.
We have been meeting with kindness and hospitality everywhere. I am sure that not only myself, but all of the group that has come with me and are present here, join me in giving our sincere thanks for all the warmth and kindness we have met here.
I hope, as well, that the good relations between our two countries will always remain very strong. We believe in the same things, and we have the same path. I assure you that as far as we are concerned in Jordan, we will continue to fight the best way we can--no matter what the difficulties may be--to preserve our independence, the integrity of our country and our beliefs, and to defend the whole nation, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
It is a great privilege and honor. I should like to ask you gentlemen to join me now in a toast to your good health and happiness.
