Dwight D. Eisenhower
March 17, 1954

Statement by the President Upon Signing Executive Order Strengthening the Scientific Programs of the Federal Government.
SCIENCE has a vital role in our Nation's security and growth. During the past half-century, it has brought about a vast transformation in industry, in agriculture, in medicine, in transportation, and in communications. Military, science has been revolutionized by technological development. The impact of science is increasingly felt in every field of public policy including foreign affairs. All this has been brought about through a combination of vision, initiative, business enterprise, a strong educational system, and the dedicated enthusiasm of the scientific community.
The responsibilities of the Federal Government toward science have likewise changed greatly. In 1940, the Federal Government spent about one hundred million dollars in supporting research and development. The budget which I have just transmitted to the Congress calls for expenditures for these purposes in the next fiscal year of over two billion dollars. This is convincing evidence of the important role of science and technology in our national affairs.
This rapid expansion of Federal responsibility requires prudent administration. More than half of all the investment in the Nation today for scientific research and development is being made by the Federal Government. In large measure, these Federal funds are paid to industry and educational institutions for the conduct of research and development projects. Thus our Federal policies and practices regarding research and development are felt immediately and substantially by industry and our educational institutions.
More than ninety percent of this Federal support is presently going into applied research and development. This is the practical application of basic knowledge to a variety of products and devices. However, only a small fraction of the Federal funds is being used to stimulate and support the vital ,basic research which makes possible our practical scientific progress. I believe strongly that this Nation must extend its support of research in basic science.
While the Executive Order which I have signed today calls upon the National Science Foundation to carry out important responsibilities in regard to scientific research, it is also designed to strengthen the conduct and support of vital research and development in the several agencies where science is important in achieving their assigned missions.
This order will, for the first time, set in motion important steps leading to a thorough and continuing review of the status of the Federal Government's activities in science, and thus enable the Government, together with industry, higher education, and the scientific community to move forward with assurance toward the achievement of the Nation's goals.
I expect and believe that this order will clarify the position of the Government toward the support and advancement of science in the Nation, and that it will contribute in a constructive sense to the development of our national policy in this important and critical area.
Note: Executive Order 10521, "Administration of Scientific Research by Agencies of the Federal Government," is published in title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations, 1954 Supplement, p. 49.