Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 27, 1955

Citation and Remarks at Presentation of the National Security Medal to J. Edgar Hoover
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY MEDAL TO JOHN EDGAR HOOVER
The President of the United States takes pride in presenting the National Security Medal to



JOHN EDGAR HOOVER



for service as set forth in the following
CITATION:
As Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation for 31 years, he has made an outstanding contribution to the national security of the United States. Exercising exceptional tact, perceptiveness, judgment, and brilliant leadership in a position of great responsibility, he has established the highest ideals of federal law enforcement and has directed them to realization. His tireless efforts have brought to a new height of effectiveness the law enforcement machinery of the United States Government. Through his well-grounded and clearly defined concept of investigative procedures, reinforced by his recognized integrity and high personal prestige, he has won international recognition for the federal law enforcement system of the United States.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
[Remarks of the President]
Mr. Hoover, your dedication and devotion to public service are so long and so well known, your accomplishments in that service are so great and so well known, that it seems idle for me to try to say anything that could add to the dignity of this ceremony.
Perhaps it is just best for me to say I am proud to be an agent for our people in conferring upon you this highest award that the Government has, and to say that your real reward--as all of us here know--is in the hearts, the thanks and the gratitude of our entire nation.
Note: The President spoke in the Rose Garden. Mr. Hoover's response follows:
Thank you, Mr. President. I am deeply grateful for this honor which you have accorded me. I realize that it has been brought about through the dedicated accomplishments of the personnel and my associates in the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as well as by the magnificent support which you as President and which the Attorney General has afforded us over the years.
It is a pleasure, indeed, to serve as one of your subordinates.