Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 26, 1959

Memorandum Concerning Proposed Agreement With Germany for Cooperation on Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defense.
[Released May 26, 1959. Dated May 4, 1959]
Memorandum for:

The Secretary of Defense

The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission
In your joint letter to me of May 1, 1959, you recommended that I approve a proposed Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of The Federal Republic of Germany for Cooperation on the Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defense Purposes.
The Federal Republic of Germany is participating with the United States in an international arrangement pursuant to which it is making substantial and material contributions to the mutual defense and security. The proposed Agreement will permit cooperation necessary to improve the state of training and operational readiness of the armed forces of The Federal Republic of Germany, subject to provisions, conditions, guarantees, terms, and special determinations, which are most appropriate in this important area of mutual assistance, in accordance with the agreement in principle reached in December 1957.
Having considered your joint recommendations and the cooperation provided for in the Agreement, including security safeguards and other terms and conditions of the Agreement, I hereby
(1) approve the program for the transfer of non-nuclear parts of atomic weapon systems involving Restricted Data under the terms and conditions provided in your joint letter and the proposed Agreement; however, types, quantities and conditions of transfer of such parts are subject to my further approval;
(2) determine that the performance of this Agreement will promote and will not constitute an unreasonable risk to the common defense and security of the United States; and
(3) approve the proposed Agreement and authorize its execution for the Government of the United States in a manner designated by the Secretary of State.
After execution of the Agreement, I shall submit it to the Congress.
I am forwarding a copy of this memorandum to the Secretary of State.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Similar memorandums relating to agreements with the Netherlands and Turkey were sent to the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission. Other memorandums relating to agreements with specific countries were released by the White House and published in the Congressional Record as follows: France and the United Kingdom (May 26, vol. 105, pp. 8160, 8163, respectively), Canada (June 9, vol. 105, p. 9240), and Greece (June 17, vol. 105, p. 10030).