Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 21, 1956

Memorandum Stating Policies Governing the Leasing of Farm Lands by the Federal Government.
Memorandum for the Heads of all Executive Departments and Agencies:
In order that the leasing of farm lands owned by the Federal Government shall be consistent with the Administration's determined effort to reduce price-depressing surpluses and to bring agricultural production into line with markets, I request that the following-described policies governing the leasing of farm lands by the Federal Government, to the extent that such policies are not inconsistent with law, be placed in effect by all departments and agencies concerned on the effective date of this memorandum:
1. Except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 4 hereof, leases of farm lands made by the Federal Government on or after the effective date of this memorandum shall prohibit the cultivation of price-supported crops in surplus supply.
2. In the case of acquisitions of farm lands by the Federal Government on or after the effective date of this memorandum, if price-supported crops in surplus supply are growing on such lands at the time of acquisition, the harvesting of such crops may be permitted.
3. No lease of farm lands by the Federal Government which is in effect on the effective date hereof shall be terminated under authority of this memorandum, but this memorandum shall not be construed to affect any authority which may otherwise exist for the termination of any such lease.
4. Upon the expiration of leases of farm lands by the Federal Government which do not prohibit the cultivation of price-supported crops in surplus supply (including those in effect on the effective date of this memorandum, and including those made as provided for in this paragraph, but not including any agreement made with respect to harvesting pursuant to paragraph 2 of this memorandum), whether such lands may thereafter be leased for the cultivation of price-supported crops in surplus supply shall be determined equitably. The controlling department or agency, according to its particular circumstances, may make such determinations on an individual lease basis or on an area basis. In arriving at such determinations, consideration shall be given to the interests of individual farmers and the local community, the supply situation of crops that might be grown on the lands, the effect on price-support programs, the objectives of the programs under which such lands were acquired or reserved, and maintenance savings and income to the Federal Government. If it is at any time determined, pursuant to this paragraph, that a lease of farm lands by the Federal Government shall prohibit the cultivation of price-supported crops in surplus supply, any lease of such lands made at any time thereafter by the Federal Government shall prohibit the cultivation of such crops.
5. In determining the acreage in each unit of farm land to be offered for lease by the Federal Government, consideration shall be given to the leasing of such land for family-size farm operations.
6. As used in this memorandum:
(a) The term "lease" shall include permits and licenses.
(b) The term "price-supported crops in surplus supply" shall mean those cultivated crops supported pursuant to the Agricultural Act of 1949, as amended and supplemented, and determined from time to time by the Secretary of Agriculture to be in surplus supply.
7. To insure that the leasing of farm lands by the Federal Government shall be consistent with the Administration's farm program, the Department of Agriculture, until such time as some appropriate interagency group or committee may be designated, shall be available as a focal agency for consultation in such matters.
8. All departments and agencies concerned shall submit to the Bureau of the Budget within sixty days from the date of this memorandum copies of implementing instructions to their operating organizations.
This memorandum shall become effective sixty days after the date hereof.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER