Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 19, 1960

Remarks to the Staff of the U.S. Embassy and the American Community in Lisbon.
THANK YOU very much. Did you see that cartoon not long ago where it says, "The next speaker needs all the introduction he can get"? Well, I rather feel that way, after coming from this last meeting in Pads.
While none of the world--certainly none of the free world--thought that there was going to be any great revolutionary gains, still we had a right to hope, I think, that there would be some further amelioration of those conditions that seem to cause so much disorder and tension in the world. I think that you deserve to know that the Western representatives-the representatives of Great Britain and of France, and the company that went with me to Paris--did their very best to bring about this kind of condition. And certainly every one of us answered abuse with decency and logic, and accusation with a simple statement of facts.
Now I think there is no reason to be particularly dismayed or disheartened. This kind of struggle has been going on for a long time, but I think it does mean this: each of us, and particularly those who are living here all the time in an Embassy and in other activities that come under the general purview of the governmental activities of America, have to work a little bit harder.
We do know that we have a tremendous friend in Portugal. We have to strengthen that friendship, because every time we have a setback in the effort to bring about better conditions between the two opposite camps of the world, this means that our own camp must be brought closer together by voluntary effort, by deeper convictions, by more dedication to the great cause of peace with justice in freedom.
So when I meet members of this kind of a colony--and I have done so now, I suppose, in the last few months in 15 or 16 countries--I never fail to get some inspiration, because I know that they are working so hard.
Perhaps leaders here and there may make mistakes, but at least they certainly never make the mistake of deprecating or of minimizing the value of the work you people are doing. So I say, rather than being dismayed, we have to tighten our belts, put our chins up a little higher, and if we can, be more eloquent in telling the story that we have.
To meet such a group as this, always far away--far from home, we feel somewhat like we are at home again. This is not only an inspiration, it is a great joy, a lot of fun--normally along with you come all the little youngsters, who sit in front and I really think I have more fun with them than I do some of you grownups, because I think possibly I am one of those simple creatures who thinks in those terms, and we get along famously.
But to each of you--first of all, I thank you for coming out, doing me the honor to come here to meet with me just briefly. I also repeat my appreciation for what you are doing, and in a more official sense, my gratitude and my thanks for what the people and those like you all around the world are doing to present the picture. And I will tell you flatly: I have gone many, many places, in different kinds of countries, and there's one book that was written that I felt did more disservice to the honest public servant of America, doing exactly what you people are doing, than any other.
There were obviously some elements of truth in what he said, but the exaggeration and the distortion to my mind were sickening.
So to you I want to say thanks, as earnestly as I can. And if I can say one more word: keep it up, and a little bit stronger, a little better, a little bigger.
I am very proud of every one of you.
Thank you very much.
Note: The President spoke at 12:55 p.m. in a reception room at Queluz Palace, his official residence while in Lisbon.