Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 23, 1955

Remarks to the President's Committee on the Employment of the Physically Handicapped.
General Maas, Judge Cathey, Prizewinners in the Essay Contest, and Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is a great privilege to meet again with this Committee, even though my meeting with you is for a few brief moments only.
We have a country dedicated to equality of opportunity. We make much in many Fourth of July speeches that this equality of opportunity goes to all, regardless of race, color, religion, and so on. It seems to me that we might extend it, at least within our own hearts and minds, to include: "Or to any who may be somewhat physically different or handicapped so long as that person can be made a useful member of society."
No one wants to be a ward of charity. Indeed, this word "opportunity" seems to me to contain much that means happiness for the human--opportunity to expand and to be useful, to know that he is contributing his share to the advancement of that great society of which he is a part.
I think it even goes this far: we can differentiate between a government that is based upon individual opportunity, and one that is based upon regimentation, in this way: opportunity brings that richness of productivity in which all may share. Individual initiative, harnessed together for the good of the whole, is the most productive inspiration and impulse we have.
Regimentation does nothing but distribute deficits--deficits that occur when we don't take advantage of these great impulses in the human heart and mind to produce what he can for himself and for his society.
I repeat I believe, therefore, that opportunity--individual opportunity and freedom--enriches a whole society, and regimentation merely distributes the losses that have occurred.
So it seems to me we cannot afford for one moment to neglect placing opportunity in front of all that are capable of doing anything whatsoever with it. And the mere fact that a person may be minus a limb or one of his senses, or anything else, has nothing to do with it, any more than do the other differences among humans that we conclude should not be allowed to sway us in the government that is applied to all.
I could think of no greater service that this Committee over the years has contributed to the United States than to bring to each--not only the handicapped people themselves, but to all of us--the fact that opportunity does truly belong to all. We are not going to be satisfied until it is brought to them, and they are allowed to take full advantage for their own betterment and that of our glorious country.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to be with you once again. It is truly a great privilege. Good morning.
Note: The President spoke at the annual meeting of the Committee in the Departmental Auditorium at 10:00 a.m. His opening words "General Maas, Judge Cathey" referred to Melvin J. Maas, Chairman of the Committee, and Sam M. Cathey, Judge of the Police Court of Asheville, N.C., who was chosen as the "Handicapped American of the Year."