Dwight D. Eisenhower
May 29, 1957

Exchange of Messages Between the President and the King of Tunisia on the First Anniversary of Its Independence.
Your Majesty:
It is with sincere pleasure that I take the occasion of the visit of the Vice President of the United States to your country to send you this letter of personal greetings.
I know that your nation, soon to celebrate the first anniversary of its independence, shares the desire of the entire Free World for international peace and justice and works actively to fulfill the role which has fallen to it as a member of the family of nations. I am also aware that you and your government are dedicated to the furtherance of the welfare of your people.
I am therefore especially pleased that the Vice President is able to see Tunisia at first hand and to talk with you and the members of your government concerning your nation's policies and problems. I look forward to his return to the United States and his personal report to me of his visit.
I extend to you my best wishes for your continued health and happiness,

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The King's message follows:
In the name of Allah, the Beneficent,
the Merciful From: Mohamed Lamine (the
First), King of Tunisia To: His Excellency Dwight D.
Eisenhower, President of the United States of America
We received with great happiness and pleasure the message of amity and friendship which Your Excellency sent to Us through your Honorable Vice President, Mr. Nixon, on the occasion of his visit to Our country to attend the celebration of the first anniversary of Our independence.
It is Our pleasure to avail Ourselves of this opportunity to record Our great satisfaction with the noble sentiments and good wishes of the friendly American people for the Tunisfan people who, for a long time, have not ceased to strive toward strengthening the bonds of amity and close cooperation between Our two countries.
We avail Ourselves of this opportunity to express to Your Excellency Our respect for your noble person and Our best wishes for the honor, prestige, and well-being of your people.
Greetings from your friend,
MOHAMED LAMINE
King of Tunisia