Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 04, 1953

Executive Order 10499—Delegating Functions Conferred Upon the President by Section 8 of the Uniformed Services Contingency Option Act of 1953
By virtue of the authority vested in me by section 301 of title 3 of the United States Code, and as President of the United States, it is ordered as follows:
SECTION 1. Except as otherwise provided in this order, the Secretary of Defense is hereby authorized and empowered to perform, without the approval, ratification, or other action of the President, the functions vested in the President by section 8 of the Uniformed Services Contingency Option Act of 1953, approved August 8, 1953 (Public Law 239, 83d Congress), hereinafter referred to as the Act. The Secretary of Defense, after appropriate consultation with the Secretaries of the Treasury, Commerce, and Health, Education, and Welfare, shall prepare for each fiscal year a consolidated report on operations and financing of the benefits authorized by the Act and shall present such report to the President not later than four months following the close of the fiscal year, for transmittal by the President to the Congress.
SEC. 2. The Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the Navy, the Secretary of the Air Force, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare are hereby severally authorized and empowered to perform, without the approval, ratification, or other action of the President, the function vested in the President by section 8 of the Act of prescribing regulations for the administration of the Act; provided that the regulations prescribed by any such Secretary shall relate only to the Department of which the Secretary is the head.
SEC. 3. The regulations prescribed by the said Secretaries under section 2 of this order shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of Defense; shall be designed to achieve the uniform, equitable, and economical administration of the Act; shall include uniform tables of actuarial equivalents and provision that term insurance values shall be computed by uniform methods prescribed by the Board of Actuaries provided for in section 8 of the Act; and, to the extent deemed necessary, shall include (a) procedures for informing personnel of their rights, for submitting elections and claims, and for reconsideration of determinations, and (b) definitions of terms.
SEC 4. Functions under section 8 of the Act with respect to the selection of a member of the Board of Actuaries from among the membership of the Society of Actuaries and the fixing of his compensation are reserved to the President.
SEC 5. The meaning of the terms "functions" and "perform" as used in this order shall be the same as the meaning of those terms as used in chapter 4 of title 3 of the United States Code.
This order shall become effective on November 1, 1953.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
THE WHITE HOUSE,
November 4, 1953.