Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 10, 1954

Special Message to the Senate Transmitting the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and Protocol Thereto.
To the United States Senate:
With a view to receiving the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification, I transmit herewith a copy of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and the Protocol thereto, both signed at Manila on September 8, 1954.
I transmit also for the information of the Senate a copy of a declaration known as the Pacific Charter which was drawn up at Manila and signed on that same date. The Charter proclaims the dedication of the signatory governments to the ideals of self-determination, self-government, and independence. It is a declaration of principles and does not require the advice and consent of the Senate.
There is further transmitted for the information of the Senate the report made to me by the Secretary of State regarding the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and the Protocol thereto. I concur in the recommendation of the Secretary that the "unanimous agreement" required by Article IV, paragraph 1, for the designation of States or territories, by Article VII for the invitation to States to accede to the Treaty, and by Article VIII for a change in the treaty area is to be understood in each instance as requiring the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Treaty is designed to promote security and peace in Southeast Asia and the Southwestern Pacific by deterring communist and other aggression in that area. It is a treaty for defense against both open armed attack and internal subversion. Included in the Treaty is an Understanding on behalf of the United States that the only armed attack in the Treaty area which the United States would regard as necessarily dangerous to our peace and security would be a communist armed attack. The Treaty calls for economic cooperation to enable the free countries of this area to gain strength and vigor, not only militarily, but also socially and economically.
The Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty complements our other security treaties in the Pacific and constitutes an important link in the collective security of the free nations of Southeast Asia and the Pacific.
I recommend that the Senate give early and favorable consideration to the Treaty and Protocol submitted herewith, and advise and consent to the ratification thereof subject to the understanding of the United States contained in the Treaty.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The treaty and related papers are printed in Senate Executive K (83d Cong., 2d sess.). The treaty and protocol were approved by the Senate on February 1, 1955, and after ratification entered into force February 19, 1955 (6 UST 81).