Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 05, 1956

Closed Circuit Television Remarks to a Group in Boston, Massachusetts, on Election Eve.
[Delivered from the White House Library at 8:55 p.m.]
Mr. Whittier, and My Friends:
First, let me say what a disappointment it has been for Mamie and me that we could not come to Boston this evening. I think I scarcely need explain to you how immediately pressing the affairs of government have been for the past few days, and I am sure. you understand thoroughly why I thought it inadvisable, if not impossible, to make the trip.
Now, as I address you this evening, I want to say, first, a word to those friends who believe as I do about the affairs of government and the philosophy that it follows in dealing with its people and with others. It is that we need through all echelons of government support to carry out the programs that you know are classed as the Administration's programs. And so I think it not out of place that I should commend to you the election of Sumner Whittier and your slate of State candidates in Massachusetts.
I am pleased, of course, for the chance to greet many old friends, Joe Martin, Chris Herter, and Senator Leverett Saltonstall. And then among your Congressional candidates, all of whom I hope you will elect--I want to mention especially Laurence Curtis, Gene Farnam, Mary Wheeler and Foster Doty. It is my conviction that those that you will vote on tomorrow would be very helpful in pushing the program in which I so firmly believe.
Now in this campaign which is so rapidly drawing to a close, my associates and I have gone up and down the land contrasting the conditions of 1952 with those of today--1956.
We think the record is a very good one, but we have not done this, I assure you, just to be boasting. There is so much yet to be done that no honest, humble man would be boasting. But we have offered these proofs--these actions--that show where promises have been kept as proof of what we will do with the pledges we have yet to make.
So we have talked about our strength, and in both defensive strength and our economic strength, as proof of the keeping of pledges we have made in the past. We have done the same about the fiscal integrity of the government. That is why, also, we have talked about more jobs and better pay. We have talked about tax cuts, and we have talked about personal security. All of these things, as I say, are merely to recall to your minds that we have made pledges about them. We made similar pledges about the efforts to assist areas that have not been sharing equitably in the general prosperity of the country. As you know, we have developed many ways and means of helping them, including some tax cuts, other types of help, that involves government procurement, and so on.
So, all this persistent work has been done so as to translate into actual action, for the benefit of all Americans, the pledges that we have made to you in the past.
But there is so much to do. Many things yet unfinished. For example, we need schools--we need them desperately--we need them now. We need more help for these lagging areas--areas that have been damaged either by industries and factories moving to other areas or because industries in which they were engaged, such as mining, have suffered losses due to changes in the types of fuel used by industry.
Small business needs still more attention, and there will be bills submitted to the Congress for translating into laws to help them out.
New highways--we have got a highway program launched. Now we must push it, and that highway program itself does not represent at all everything that we must do.
Airports--new airports--new safety measures--means to make certain that air travel constantly increases in its safety as it increases in its speed.
Health and special programs for the aged are another of the things that still must be carried forward to new levels.
One thing that has lagged, although we have made some little progress, is immigration. Our immigration laws and how they affect the various areas of the world, and indeed how they affect us and our own future welfare--we will submit to the Congress renewed recommendations as to how these immigration laws may be better adjusted to our needs.
And of course, with all of this, we shall continue the effort-always--to keep government honest, fair and just. And that only fiscal integrity will characterize the monetary policies of your government.
Now, outside of the United States, the great objective of all true Americans remains: world peace.
Now, in recent days we have had many crises that have tested our readiness to stand by principle. Justice--justice is a necessary part of world peace, because without justice there will be no peace. And there must be one law for all, not just one for us and one for the others. We must have one law that rules us all.
And then, because of the events in Eastern Europe, our hearts have gone out to the people of Poland, and to Hungary, and we shall have given them the promise, not only that we shall never forget them and hold them dear in our hearts, but we have made offers of economic help--food, shelter, clothing, medicines-which we sincerely hope they may be able to accept.
So in those two areas we rejoice that two of the great Cardinals-symbols of freedom and the desire for liberation--two others have recently been at least temporarily liberated: the great Cardinals, both of Poland and Hungary.
So, alive to the needs of people, we will keep working for the kind of peace that we have always promised you--one that all the world can participate in.
Now, in the months ahead, we will need your support just as much as we have in this campaign. For the support you have given us, we thank you sincerely. But if we are all going to work together, we must start out by voting tomorrow. Indeed, no matter how you vote, be sure you vote. Because tonight I can assure you: In all the world there is no privilege that is more priceless and more sought after than the privilege that is yours tomorrow.
To keep it alive--for ourselves, for our children, for our country-for freedom: exercise it. Because, by exercising it, you will preserve it.
Thank you very much, and goodnight.
Note: The President's opening words referred to Lieutenant Governor Sumner Whittier, Republican candidate for Governor.