Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 07, 1956

Radio and Television Remarks Following the Election Victory
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice President, my very good friends in this audience and everywhere in the United States to whatever areas my voice reaches:
This is a solemn moment. The only thing I should like to say about this campaign is this: It is a very heart-warming experience to know that your labors--your efforts--of four years have achieved that level where they are approved by the United States of America in a vote.
Such a vote as that cannot be merely for an individual, it is for principles and ideals for which that individual and his associates have stood and have tried to exemplify.
To all the people of the United States who have understood what the Administration--the Republican Party--has been trying to do in these past four years, and consequently have worked so hard for the re-election of that Administration, my most grateful thanks.
The only thing I can say to all the people--all the Americans who have voted that ticket which puts us back into the same positions of responsibility--I can only say, it is our earnest prayer that nothing we can ever do or shall ever do--will betray that trust.
And now let me say something that looks to the future: I think that modern Republicanism has now proved itself. And America has approved of modern Republicanism.
And so, as we look ahead--as we look ahead to the problems in front, let us remember that a political party deserves the approbation of America only as it represents the ideals, the aspirations and the hopes of Americans. If it is anything less, it is merely a conspiracy to seize power. And the Republican Party is not that!
Modern Republicanism looks to the future. Which means it looks to that area--that time--in which our young are most interested. And this means that it will gain constantly new recruits from the youngest of our voters. And as such, as long as it remains true to the ideals and the aspirations of America, it will continue to increase in power and influence for decades to come. It will point the way to peace among nations, and to prosperity-advancing standards here at home in which everybody will share, regardless of any accident of birth, of station, of race, religion, or color.
And if we cling to these ideals, if we uphold them, if we fight for them, then I say: Republicans deserve, then, the vote of confidence that Republicans, friendly Democrats, and Independents, have given us this day.
My friends, I conclude with a pledge: with whatever talents the good God has given me, with whatever strength there is within me, I will continue--and so will my associates--to do just one thing: to work for 168 million Americans here at home-and for peace in the world.
Note: The President spoke at the Sheraton-Park Hotel, Washington, D.C., at 1:50 a.m. His opening words "Mr. Chairman," referred to Leonard W. Hall, Chairman of the Republican National Committee, who introduced the Vice President. The Vice President then introduced the President.