Dwight D. Eisenhower
November 03, 1960

Letter to Dr. Milton S. Eisenhower on the Occasion of His Resignation From Two Advisory Committees.
Dear Milton:
With great reluctance, I am accepting your resignation as a member of the President's Advisory Committee on Government Organization, and am informing the Secretary of State that you wish to be relieved as a member of the National Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs.
I am delighted that, at the suggestion of the Department of the Navy and in accordance with our recent conversation, you will continue to serve on the Board of Visitors of the United States Naval Academy.
I know how difficult it has been for you, as President of the Johns Hopkins University, to give time to these important advisory committees, and additionally to serve as my personal representative on many major missions to Latin America. Your wisdom, experience, and common sense have time and again led to constructive recommendations for difficult problems. Your judgments and advice have been sound--practically, as well as morally.
Your work and concrete suggestions on government organization have been of substantial help in keeping the government abreast of changing requirements and in promoting economy and efficiency in government operations. You should take particular satisfaction from the fact that since 1953, fourteen reorganization plans have become effective, and seven other important reorganization measures have been put into operation by executive action. As a member of the Advisory Committee on Government Organization, you can take justifiable pride in having played an important role in the establishment of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, the United States Information Agency, the International Cooperation Administration, the Federal Aviation Agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Agency, and the Federal Council on Science and Technology.
Many ideas useful both to me and the Secretary of State have already come from the National Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs, which you first proposed in December, 1958, and your work in the area of Inter-American relations has been an inspiration to all people who believe that common problems can be resolved through mutual efforts.
In accepting your resignations from these two significant Advisory Committees, I want you to know that your counsel during the years I have occupied the Presidency has been a source of steady satisfaction to me personally. Your contribution to the cause of good government will be self-evident.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Dr. Eisenhower's letter to the President, and a letter to Dr. Eisenhower from Secretary Herter relieving him of duty on the National Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs, were also released.