Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 17, 1953

Remarks to a Group of Republican Workers in New Orleans
THANK YOU very much--thank you very much. This reminds me a little bit of last year, ladies and gentlemen. If you remember, I was nominated over in Chicago, and immediately all the party strategists came to give me advice. And most of it, I suppose, was good.
One thing they told me was to stay out of the South. That may have been good political advice, of course. I didn't know. Everybody knew I wasn't a politician--and I'm not yet. But one thing I did know: that I had promised a lot of people that if ever I got in politics, I was going to come to the South. And so--come what may--I was going to keep that promise.
And so, the first crowd I ever met in the South was, I think, in Atlanta. I don't know how many people were there, but they filled that whole square and down the side streets, all along the way--and the same in Jacksonville, Miami, and down that way. And finally, somewhere along in October--I think the day before my birthday--I got to New Orleans, and I don't think I ever saw so big a jam in one place. Finally, I decided to do something. When I got over to Texas, I called up one of these party strategists, and I said "Just how big is a corporal's guard?" As you know, when I was a lieutenant in the Army, a corporal's guard was about eight men.
Now, they say you can't have a two-party system in the South. Well, it looks to me like there is one here. If you could take just the people in this room--this minute--and place them absolutely strategically all over the State of Louisiana--put them exactly where you want them--there is no question about the influence you would immediately swing.
You are people that respond to the requirements of leadership. You have got brains enough to know that it is the South that needs a two-party system, not a bunch of politicians--not a bunch of Democrats, or anybody else. It's the South that needs a two-party system, if it is to be truly emancipated.
It has got to have such influence in all national affairs that, regardless of which party has come into power, the brains and the talent of the Southern States are as willing and as well organized, and as immediately available to the central government as if they came from some other region.
But let me give you some bitter experience--this much on a personal basis. If the Republicans win today, they have to come down and find someone they trust and say here is a good man that can represent the viewpoint of this region. Because almost everybody that has been in a political organization, that has been in political life, for years and years in the South has been Democratic.
Now you have the brains to know that, and that is the first requirement of leadership. Next, you have got enthusiasm. I know that, because John Wisdom tells me you have been here since 9 o'clock this morning. You couldn't possibly have gone to all the trouble of getting off today and be here to give me the opportunity to meet with you for these few moments, unless you had enthusiasm.
You have faith--or you wouldn't have done the work in the Southland that a Republican must do to hold up his head. Republicans haven't been too popular here for a good many decades, and you had to have faith to do what you could to restore the party to a position of complete respectability--and you have done it.
By the way, John Wisdom told me on the way out here that there was a Mayor and three councilmen of a little town somewhere elected in Louisiana. Is that Mayor here? I would like to see his hand. Good to see you! Congratulations!
I should like to say, gentlemen, that some very, very great oaks have grown from small acorns--and he looks like a pretty good-sized acorn to me.
But it does mean intelligence. It does mean enthusiasm. It does mean faith. Readiness to go to work--and work for what you want, and what you believe in.
What we must believe in is: honest government. The Republican Party is not of any particular use because it has a nice-sounding name. It is of use only if it can give the United States of America better government at home, and better understanding abroad. That is your dedication.
And I want to make one thing clear, my friends. We don't have to claim credit for all the deeds, all the talents, all the dedication, all the patriotism, in the Republican Party. Not at all. But we do know that unless there is competition in things like that, that free government can perish. That it is only intelligent, dedicated opposition that keeps people in power right up on their toes.
There is surely one way to keep both parties decent. That is for both parties to be strong, and composed of people who have one thought: the United States of America, and her standing in the world and at home.
Now that, my very good friends, I realize, is not a very profound message. Every one of you knows it--and knows the truth of every fact I have stated, just as well as I know it.
The only thing I do see worth while in this meeting, then, is that I may stand before you and, as the President of all the United States--not just of the Republican Party, but of the United States of America--give you my dedication to remain as true to that kind of undertaking and that kind of philosophy as I know how to do.
That kind of pledge will help you set about the task which at times must look hopeless. Well then, I assure you, that kind of help, as much as I can give, will always be there.
And one other word: don't ever let anyone get you hopeless in the long fight. I had an old general that I thought the world of as my teacher, years ago. And one day I was working on something pretty hard--down in Panama it was--something pretty hard. I didn't see any way out of it. And he said to me, "Well, I will tell you, Eisenhower"--he was from Mississippi, talked like that--"there is one thing sure: the harder a problem, the more necessary it is to smile. A tough one is never won by a long face. Don't forget that."
So among other things, keep a grin on your face.
Goodbye.
Note: The President spoke at 12:40 p.m. at Moisant Airport, New Orleans, La.