Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 06, 1958

Letter to Harold H. Burton Regarding His Retirement from Active Service as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
[ Released October 6, 1958. Dated September 23, 1958 ]
Dear Mr. Justice:
It is with great regret that I have read your notice of retirement on Monday, October 13, 1958, as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
I share, with millions of our citizens, the conviction that, as a member of the Court, you served with high distinction and great dedication to the principles under which we live and the changing conditions of the world today. The decisions of the Court are helping to shape--as they have in the past--the destiny of our country. This realization has imposed upon you vital responsibilities, which I know you have discharged seriously and conscientiously. Your work on the Supreme Court was, of course, but a continuation of your earlier years of devoted and dedicated public service. Our country is indebted to you.
I trust that with the leisure your retirement will bring, your health will greatly improve.
Mrs. Eisenhower joins me in best wishes to you and Mrs. Burton, and in expressions of our feelings of personal friendship for you both.

Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Justice Burton's letter, dated July 17, follows:
Dear Mr. President:
Having passed the permissive retirement age of 70, and having rendered over 25 years of public service, including nearly 13 as a member of this Court, I hereby submit this notice of my retirement from further active service as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States to take effect at the close of Monday, October 13, 1958. I do this with regret but in accordance with competent medical advice and with a desire to serve the best interests of all concerned.
Mrs. Burton and I wish to express, through you, to the people of the United States our deep appreciation of the privilege which has been mine for so long to serve their interests to the extent of my ability to do so.
Respectfully yours,
HAROLD H. BURTON