Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 15, 1956

Remarks Inaugurating the "Your Government and You" Five-Minute Broadcasts.
[Recorded on film for telecasting at 9:25 and 10: 25 p.m.]
THE NEXT three weeks are vitally important to every man, woman and child in the United States. On November sixth, you will decide, by your votes, how you will live, work and prosper during the next four years.
You, as voters, will make this decision for yourselves and for your children--and, perhaps, for generations yet to come.
On your decision will depend whether this country will go forward with peace, security and prosperity.
To help you arrive at it, your Administration in Washington will try diligently through the next three weeks to explain its record of achievements, the problems before it and the policies by which it proposes to solve them.
I think the men best qualified to tell you what we have tried to do and what we honestly believe we have accomplished, are the men who have headed the great Departments of Government where this Administration has built its record in office during the last three and one-half years.
So, under the general title--"Your Government and You"-some of the leading members of the Administration will speak to you in your homes of what they have done and are doing for your happiness and well-being.
You will hear your Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, tell of the spirit that impels us in achieving peace and the record we have made as a Nation in our united effort for peace.
You will hear your Secretary of the Treasury, George Humphrey, tell how his department has checked the galloping inflation, cut taxes, balanced the budget and reduced the debt.
You will hear your Secretary of Defense, Charles E. Wilson, tell how we have saved billions of dollars on the Armed Forces, reduced our manpower requirements and still provided a more secure defense.
You will hear your Secretary of Labor, James Mitchell, tell how employment, wages and income have reached the highest levels in history.
You will hear your Attorney-General, the Secretary of our new Department of Health, Education and Welfare, and other Cabinet officers tell what we have done to combat monopoly, to extend social security for 70 million Americans, and other accomplishments of this Republican Administration.
I am proud of the record and I think you will be proud of it, too. So let me ask you one thing. Whenever you can, listen to this series and talk the facts over with your family and friends. Then make up your mind as to how you will vote on November sixth.
I for one--and all who work with me--will be happy to rest our case on your honest judgment.