Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 12, 1959

Joint Statement by the President and the President of Mexico.
DURING THE VISIT of President Adolfo Lopez Mateos to Washington, President Dwight D. Eisenhower and the President of Mexico renewed and strengthened the friendship which began at their meeting at Acapulco, Mexico, last February. Informally and without an agenda they exchanged views on general subjects of mutual interest to Mexico and the United States and on subjects of hemispheric and world concern in that atmosphere of cordiality and frankness which characterizes true friendship.
With regard to economic problems of much interest to public opinion in Mexico the two Presidents noted with satisfaction the recent strengthening of the Mexican economy. Special mention was made of the fact that although Mexico has had at its disposal since January of the current year a balance of payments credit from the Export-Import Bank in the amount of 100 million dollars, it has proved unnecessary to make use of more than a small part of this credit.
The Presidents were also heartened by the progress made towards resolving important commodity problems and consequent improvements in world market conditions with respect to basic commodities produced in Mexico and the United States, including the strengthening of cotton prices, the signature of the coffee agreement and the improved outlook for a better balance of supply and demand in world markets for lead and zinc.
The Presidents agreed that maintenance of the productive capacity the Mexican mining industry is essential to Mexico's economic progress and to the security of the United States. Consequently, the Governments of both countries will continue to consult each other and the other lead and zinc producing countries with regard to the measures necessary to achieve these objectives.
The problems of the United States and Mexico regarding the exploitation and conservation of the economic resources of the seas were explored by the two Presidents, and they agreed that efforts should be made to provide for the orderly use of these resources.
It was agreed that the Mexican and American scientific communities should work more closely together.
The two Presidents also expressed gratification at the cooperation which has developed in seeking solutions to common health problems and they will instruct the health authorities of the two countries to broaden the area of joint action to the greatest possible extent. The excellent progress made in the eradication of malaria in Mexico was noted, and the hope was pressed that through international cooperation similar success could be achieved in the other countries of the hemisphere where malaria is still significant problem.
At Camp David, the two Presidents chose the name Amistad Dam to designate the dam proposed to be constructed near Del Rio, Texas, and Villa Acuna, Coahuila, for flood control, conservation and storage of the waters of the Rio Grande, and possibly power generation.
Like the Acapulco meeting, the Washington visit demonstrated the firm resolve of the two Chiefs of State and of the two Governments to continue to examine their problems with understanding of and respect for each other's points of view in efforts to find solutions that are mutually beneficial to the peoples of Mexico and the United States.
The two Presidents are convinced of the value of continuing a personal relationship between the Chiefs of State of Mexico and the United States, not merely to provide an opportunity for cordial and frank exchanges of views on common problems, but more importantly, to sponsor the continued growth of friendship between the two countries and their Governments.
Lastly, the two Presidents expressed their belief that then' personal friendship and the growing cooperation between their two countries in all fields of human endeavor will be an example to the world of how two nations can live independently side by side in friendship, cooperative effort and mutual understanding.