Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 09, 1959

Statement by the President Upon Signing Executive Order Creating a Board of Inquiry To Report on the Steel Strike.
AFTER carefully studying the circumstances surrounding the thirteen-week-old steel strike, I have concluded that, if permitted to continue, this strike would imperil the national health and safety. The national interest demands an immediate resumption of production in this vital industry.
To bring about a resumption of production, I am invoking the statutory means which Congress has provided for that purpose. I have today issued an Executive Order appointing a Board of Inquiry to examine immediately into the issues of this dispute and to submit to me the report prescribed by law.
The strike has closed 85 percent of the nation's steel mills, shutting off practically all new supplies of steel. Over 500,000 steel workers and about 200,000 workers in related industries, together with their families, have been deprived of their usual means of support. Present steel supplies are low and the resumption of full-scale production will require some weeks. If production is not quickly resumed, severe effects upon the economy will endanger the economic health of the nation.
I profoundly regret that the parties to the dispute have failed to resolve their differences through the preferred methods of free collective bargaining, even though every appropriate Government service was available to them in support of their efforts. I have been advised by both parties that negotiations between them have broken down and that they see no hope for an early voluntary settlement.
Nevertheless, I want to emphasize that the action I have taken in no way relieves the parties of their grave obligation to the American people to resume negotiations and reach a just and responsible settlement at the earliest possible time.
Note: The Executive order required the Board of Inquiry to submit a report by October 16 (E.O. 10843, 24 F.R. 8289). This date was extended to October 19 by Executive Order 10848, issued October 14 (24 F.R. 8401).
See also Items 264 and 265.