Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 24, 1958

Letter Accepting Resignation of Sinclair Weeks, Secretary of Commerce.
[ Released October 24, 1958- Dated October 23, 1958 ]
Dear Sinny:
I am indeed sorry that your departure from the Cabinet and the Department of Commerce is now so imminent, but I appreciate that you have already put off this unhappy event for quite some time, much to my benefit and the Administration's. I accept your resignation as of November tenth with keen regret that it will interrupt the warm and close association we have had.
It is, of course, very gratifying to me, as it must be to you, that during your six years as Secretary of Commerce, the American economy has expanded broadly and generated for our citizens more jobs, higher incomes, and greater abundance. Now that economic growth is once again under way with industrial production recovering rapidly and with personal income at new peaks, we can look forward to continued improvements in the well-being of the American people.
You should have a very real and lasting satisfaction from your participation in this expansion of our economy and its job opportunities as also from the specific new programs you have initiated and the others you have strengthened. You ought to take particular pride in recalling the vast Highway Program undertaken in 1954--the greatest in the history of our country, the highly successful Reciprocal Trade legislation enacted just this year, last year's stimulating Conference on Research and Distribution for the Benefit of Small Business, the St. Lawrence Seaway, and the expanded shipbuilding program now under way. Progress in all of these fields, providing millions of jobs either directly or indirectly, is heartening evidence of the dynamic nature of our economy. I should mention also the significant contributions by the Department under your leadership to greater safety on the highways and airways of the Nation. You have well earned the thanks and the appreciation of Americans everywhere as they participate in and enjoy the benefits of these many services.
As you depart from Government service, you take with you my deep gratitude for your long and unstinting devotion to duty and my very best wishes for your future health and happiness. Certainly I shall not hesitate, should a need develop, to grasp your generous offer of future assistance.

With warm personal regard,

As ever,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Mr. Weeks became Secretary of Commerce on January 21, 1953. His letter, dated October 22, was released with the President's reply.