Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 25, 1954

Remarks in Connection With Secretary Dulles' Public Report at a Cabinet Meeting.
[Broadcast from the Cabinet Room at the White House at 7:00 p.m.]
Mrs. Hobby and gentlemen:
As you know, I asked you to come here this evening so that we could immediately hear a firsthand report from the Secretary of State regarding the negotiations that have just been going on in Europe, and the outcome of those negotiations. I think it is extremely important that all of us have a clear understanding of what was accomplished, and the circumstances under which it was done, and what it will probably mean.
Having determined upon this, when request was made to me that we open this meeting to the television companies, the radio companies, and the newsreels, it suddenly occurred that, for tonight, there is one subject-a very special one--about which to talk, and one which the American people, all of them, without regard to race or party or creed or color or any other thing, will want to hear.
So, for this one time, we are having this meeting of the Cabinet on all of these media of publicity.
Secretary Dulles.
[At this point Secretary Dulles reported on his trip to Bonn, London, and Paris, and on the negotiations which culminated in the agreements reached in Paris on October 23 terminating the occupation of and restoring sovereignty to Western Germany, providing for its admission to NATO, and establishing a Western European Union to consist of the six EDC nations and the United Kingdom. Alter a brief further report on the Saar Agreement the President resumed speaking.]
Yes. Well, Foster, I feel like we almost ought to give you a standing ovation. You know how intensely I believe that the safety and security of the Western World demanded unity and strength in Western Europe.
Now that that gives every promise of coming about, I can't tell you how gratified I am, not just for myself, but for the entire American people; and your colleagues thank you for this brilliant presentation. Really we do.
Note: Secretary Dulles' report to the President and the Cabinet was published, together with related documents, in "London and Paris Agreements, September-October, 1954" (Department of State Publication 5659, Government Printing Office, 1954). On October 24 a White House release stated that the President believed that all Americans would join with him in rejoicing at the success of the Paris conference, and that the agreements reached there represented a historic step toward that unity so necessary for the maintenance of the freedom of Western Europe.