Dwight D. Eisenhower
October 09, 1957

Citation Accompanying the Medal of Freedom Presented to Secretary of Defense Charles E. Wilson.
CITATION TO ACCOMPANY THE AWARD OF THE MEDAL OF FREEDOM
TO
CHARLES E. WILSON
FOR EXCEPTIONALLY MERITORIOUS
SERVICE AND CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE SECURITY OF THE UNITED STATES
For nearly five years, the positive leadership, sound judgment, and unceasing efforts of Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson, have been major factors in strengthening the security of the United States and its allies against aggression.
Under his guidance, the effectiveness of the armed forces of the United States has been greatly increased. Their strategic deployment to endangered parts of the world has been a major factor in the preservation of peace. Military assistance programs, including the provision of modern weapons, carried out under his supervision, have bolstered the will and determination of our allies to resist aggression. The common defense of free nations has been greatly furthered by his frequent discussions with foreign leaders both abroad and at home.
Under his leadership, the military programs of the Department of Defense were adjusted from the immediate requirements of the Korean conflict to those for the long range security of our country; increased emphasis was placed on the introduction of modern weapons, giving unprecedented striking power to all the Military Services; improved efficiency in management and administration permitted the achievement of our military objectives without danger to the economic welfare of the Nation.
His selfless devotion to duty and firm adherence to the basic principles and ideals upon which our country was rounded have made possible his many major accomplishments.
In recognition of his outstanding and dedicated service, I take great pleasure in presenting the Medal of Freedom to Charles Erwin Wilson.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: The President read the citation to Secretary Wilson and presented him with the Medal of Freedom at a ceremony at the White House on October 9, 1957. Immediately after the presentation, the President administered the oath of office to Neil H. McElroy, successor to Mr. Wilson as Secretary of Defense.