Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 02, 1954

Memorandum of Disapproval of Bill for the Relief of Carl Piowaty and W. J. Piowaty.
I HAVE WITHHELD my approval from H.R. 1665, "For the relief of Carl Piowaty and W. J. Piowaty."
This bill authorizes and directs the Secretary of the Treasury to pay to Carl Piowaty and W. J. Piowaty the sum of $4,450 in full settlement of their claim against the United States for war-crop advances made to them by the Regional Agricultural Credit Corporation prior to April 16, 1943.
The claims of the United States against these two persons and their claims against the United States have been adjudicated in the courts where both sides were afforded an opportunity to present all pertinent evidence on the issues involved. The case was tried before a jury in the Circuit Court of Orange County, Florida, on May 22 and 23, 1947, and a judgment was obtained against both Cad Piowaty and W. J. Piowaty for the full amount they owed. They appealed the verdict to the Supreme Court of Florida where the lower court's judgment was sustained on February 13, 1948. Appeal for a rehearing was thereafter denied.
In 1950, W. J. Piowaty and his wife instituted an action in the Circuit Court of Orange County, Florida, seeking a declaratory judgment relieving their real property from the lien of the judgment. That suit was dismissed on motion of the United States. In 1951, suit was filed by the United States against Carl Piowaty, W. J. Piowaty and the Globe Indemnity Company on the bonds which were posted when the appeal was taken to the Supreme Court of Florida. Carl Piowaty and W. J. Piowaty filed an answer in that suit, but on motion for summary judgment, judgment was rendered against all the defendants in favor of the United States on October 29, 1952.
In the light of this history of repeated judicial review, I cannot agree that Carl Piowaty and W. J. Piowaty should be given the special consideration and relief which the bill would provide.
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: This memorandum was released at Lowry Air Force Base, Denver, Colo.