Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 22, 1953

Exchange of Messages Between the President and Chancellor Adenauer on Aid for the People of East Germany and East Berlin.
[Released September 22, 1953. Dated September 21, 1953]
- Dear Mr. Chancellor:
Thank you for your letter of August 30, 1953, in which you expressed the gratitude of the people of East Berlin and the Soviet occupied zone for the help given by the United States in the food relief program. I am glad that this program has helped to alleviate the great need of these unfortunate people whose courage in the face of oppression has been admired the world over.
At the same time you call my attention to the need for warm clothing and footwear for these same people--need which might become acute during the coming winter. I can assure you that this Government is aware of this need. It is my belief that the American people will gladly and liberally respond to your plea as many of them have done in similar situations in the past through various voluntary agencies. I shall therefore bring your letter to the attention of the American people knowing that they will contribute generously to the organizations which will undertake to provide such clothing and other required and related items.
Accept, Mr. Chancellor, the renewed assurance of my highest esteem.
Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
Note: Chancellor Adenauer's message follows:
- My dear Mr. President:
It is with deep gratitude that the people of East Berlin and of the Soviet occupied zone receive the food relief granted them, thanks to speedy action of the United States administration. I on my part should like to express again my sincere gratitude for this relief. Your generous readiness to help these people in distress encourages me to submit to you another wish:
Winter will come within a few months, and we must reckon with the fact that the population of the East Sector and of the Soviet occupied zone will be in great need of warm clothing and footwear. The Federal Government will do everything in its power to alleviate distress in that respect as well. However, I should be particularly grateful if the United States' administration would see its way of promoting that relief program by making warm clothing, underwear, stockings and shoes available to the men, women and children in the distressed areas.
Accept, Mr. President, the renewed assurance of my highest esteem.
ADENAUER