Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 09, 1956

Statement by the President Marking the Opening of National Civil Defense Week.
[Recorded on film and tape]
I AM VERY HAPPY to speak on this program opening National Civil Defense Week. I do so in recognition of the fact that a new element has come into being in the total strength of the nation. The new element is the active and personal participation of every American family in building a trained readiness to cope with disaster of any kind--so strong that it will help deter aggression and constitute in itself a positive force for peace. We call it Civil Defense.
By it we recognize the facts of today, but we do not abandon the hope that eventually man can devote all his energies to the advancement of human health, wealth and happiness, rather than destruction of his neighbor.
Our purpose now is to be strong enough to preserve peace, for weakness and unreadiness invite attack. That is why last year I recommended, and the Congress approved, an appropriation of funds to enable the Federal Civil Defense Administration, in cooperation with the several States, to work out detailed, flexible plans for the defense of our communities.
These plans will require the understanding, support and participation of every American family. The observance of National Civil Defense Week will provide an opportunity for each of you to learn your part. You will find in the Civil Defense activities of your community a chance to acquire training that will make your family more self-reliant in the little emergencies of every day life. You will also find that a strong local Civil Defense is a good investment in community readiness to meet any natural disaster. Many towns and cities have already proved its worth in assuring a quick mobilization of doctors, nurses, engineers--all the men and women and equipment needed--to save lives when a sudden catastrophe struck.
Through working together in Civil Defense we become better citizens. We earn the right to live in peace, purchased in large part by our own vigilance and preparedness. We make it plain, as only a united people can, that aggression will not pay; and by discouraging aggression we will strengthen the hands of men of good will in all nations. We will contribute--each of us in his own personal way--toward the realization of that for which men have ever yearned, but never achieved: universal peace.