Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 23, 1960

Proclamation 3373—Columbus Day, 1960

Whereasfour hundred and sixty-eight years ago Christopher Columbus, with vision, faith, and the courage of his convictions, sailed out from the port of Palos, Spain, to cross the uncharted Atlantic; and
Whereason October 12, 1492, Columbus discovered the land of the New World; and
WhereasColumbus' achievement opened the Western Hemisphere to settlement and development by our forebears, whose vision, faith, and courage were akin to his own; and
Whereasin this present day of challenge we can find inspiration, both personally and nationally, in the example of this great figure in American history; and
Whereasthe Congress of the United States, proud of this history, by a joint resolution approved April 30, 1934 (48 Stat. 657), has requested the President to issue a proclamation designating October 12 of each year as Columbus Day:
Now, Therefore, I, Dwight D. Eisenhower, President of the United States of America, do hereby designate Wednesday, October 12, 1960, as Columbus Day.
I direct the appropriate officers of the Federal Government to display the flag of the United States on all Government buildings on that day; and I request the appropriate officers of State and local governments likewise to display the flag on that day.
I also invite the people of the United States to observe the day in their homes, schools, churches, and other suitable places with ceremonies and with thoughts expressive of our admiration for the man who discovered America and of our gratitude for his daring achievement.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United States of America to be affixed.
DONE at the City of Washington this twenty-third day of September in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and eighty-fifth.


DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
By the President:

DOUGLAS DILLON,

Acting Secretary of State.