Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 02, 1959

Remarks on Leaving London.
Mr. Prime Minister, and Ladies and Gentlemen:
For me there is always a bit of sadness in my heart when I leave this country. I have had many experiences here, in war and peace. I have formed some of the most valued friendships that I have. So, whenever I leave, it is a goodbye that has with it and in it a bit more of sentiment than would seem fitting to express in such a spot and before such a machine as this microphone.
But as I go, I want to say one thing about Anglo-American relationships. We talk often about their warmth and their strength--their health. I would like for all of you to remember, and on our side of the water I should hope that we always remember, the value of these relationships. To my mind, if two nations such as ours, with common traditions and almost a common language, cannot together get basic agreement upon the principles, upon the general road we want to travel as we go side by side into the future, then indeed the future of the world is bleak.
We can, with the other nations of the British Commonwealth--on our side I am sure--do our part to make these things possible, so that all of us can gain the confidence that comes from having by its side a true ally, a true friend, friends that can express their differences without rancor, can discuss difficult questions without personal animosity, and between them find a way to advance the great causes for which we stand.
And so, once more I say goodbye--except that I have a little sneaking ambition for the next weekend where I am going to stop in Scotland. So although this is goodbye to you, sir, and to my friends here, I hope to have in that lovely spot a Saturday and Sunday where I might even get in a round of golf.
Thank you very much, and goodbye.
Note: The President spoke at the London Airport at 8:50 a.m. in response to remarks by Prime Minister Macmillan. In his closing remarks the President referred to his forthcoming visit to Culzean Castle, Turnberry, Scotland, where since 1953 a suite of rooms has been at his disposal as a testimonial of Scotland's appreciation for his services as Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces in World War II.
Mr. Macmillan's remarks follow:
Mr. President, in the 5 days that you have been with us, I think you will have realized the pleasure that your visit has given to every section of the country. I shall never forget, and I think you will not, your drive from this airport to London last Thursday night, and the hundreds of thousands, almost millions, of people who came out to greet you.
You were able to make an informal visit to the Queen at Balmoral, and in addition you came with your advisers to Chequers where we did do some work, although we also had some relaxation.
And I think that you will have understood the two great outstanding features of your visit here. First, the close friendship and alliance between two peoples with so much in common--their language, their origin, their belief in the rights of the individual, in the common law, and all those things which spring from the very roots of both of us. But also you will have realized the affection which we have for you personally. And in that double capacity as the President of the United States, and if I may be allowed to say so, as General Eisenhower, you will have known how, from the real hearts of the people has gone out their affection.
We also hope that in the course of your visits to three European capitals, and your proposed interchange of visits with Mr. Khrushchev, we may be able to set out upon a road which will be fruitful for the world, and bring us that of which we spoke together two nights ago: peace and justice.
Sir, we wish you every possible success in your enterprise, and you will go from these shores knowing that you carry with you the good wishes of every man, woman, and child in the country.