Dwight D. Eisenhower
September 12, 1960

Remarks at the Opening of the Republican Campaign, friendship International Airport Near Baltimore.
Mr. Vice President, Senator Lodge, my associates in Government of whom I see so many here on the platform, and my friends:
When I was first invited to come over here this morning, I really demurred on the grounds that it was a mistake to have me here. This is the starting of a campaign, and we have new faces, new energies, new candidates. It seemed a time to just look forward, never backward.
Well, I was wrong, I think, because as an old war horse--sort of smelling a bit of the dust of battle--I have not only changed my mind, I am glad I am here. I am not even using the notes that I so laboriously scrawled down. I just want to chat with you as I have so often in the past.
First of all, I have heard this rain and this hurricane mentioned. To my mind, it is a good omen. I recall that back in 1952 in June, I was finally persuaded to come back from Europe and announce that if nominated, I would be glad to run for the Presidency of the United States. My first meeting was in Abilene, Kansas. And such a rainstorm you have never seen. Then we had no nice big room where we could have a ceremony. It was out in the ball park, and we had to take it. So I see nothing at all to be downhearted about because there is a rainstorm that impeded some of your movements.
Next, this seems to be a really good place to start a campaign such as we are now beginning. You have a record of sending champions out for the last couple of years--at least the Colts, as I understand, have been champions. I expect you can sort of adopt Dick and Cabot as another team and send them out also to win the championship. And I might mention that right behind me here is a little boy carrying a unique sign. It says: "I am for Nixon, I am for Lodge, I am for Blum." I am not exactly sure who Mr. Blum is, but down at the bottom the sign says: "I am for the Orioles." So I think this particular crowd at least could, by adoption of Dick and Cabot into their teams, possibly bring some luck.
As Republicans, we have selected our leaders for a campaign and for a Government that we hope and trust will be established in Washington for the next 4 years. They are going out as messengers--messengers to carry to every nook and corner of this country the story of the record that has been established by Republican leadership in the House, the Senate, and in the executive department over the past years. They are going out with a promise to build upon that record, respectful of its past accomplishments, but never satisfied that the answers have yet been reached to America's problems. They are going out, therefore, to stand on the platform of the Republican Party as written in Chicago. They are going to make pledges on their own part, as to the responsibilities they see before them, and how they will carry them out and perform them when elected.
They will do this honestly, as men of proved integrity. By no means will they be placing before the American people something that they think certain sections or certain groups may like, and do this presentation only in the hope of attracting votes. Whatever they say to the American people about programs, about pledges, will be a promise and a prelude for action.
They are men of demonstrated capacity in every kind of activity in carrying heavy responsibilities in the vicissitudes of foreign visits and in carrying the American flag in the United Nations debate. We have, by all odds, the finest team America could choose--for showing to America what we as a Nation are standing for in the world, what we shall fight for. We shall never be content with less.
They will fight, then, for peace. They will fight for those things that should help us toward the road to peace. They will fight for disarmament, continuing the struggle that has been going on along these years, to find whether the two opposing camps cannot, by honest negotiation, lift from the backs of men some of this burden that mankind is now condemned to carry.
There are many facets to this problem of disarmament. In the past we have proposed every conceivable kind of approach to that problem. They will possibly find new ones. But I know this: they will stand firm on this one principle--we shall have methods by which the good faith of each side may be proved, or we shall never lay down one single necessary weapon of our own.
As long as the other side is willing to adopt methods which will show the good faith of both sides--in other words, inspection--to see that both sides are doing what they say they are doing, Dick and Cabot will never cease, will never tire in this effort that means so much to people everywhere.
They will be concerned always also with the welfare, the progress of our citizens. They will look for everything to inspire, to lead our people to better heights, using Government where necessary, but depending first of all upon the initiative, the pride, and the self-respect of every single American individual wherever he is.
And of one thing they will always talk about--our liberties. They will remind every American that we will never put personal convenience, material gain, above our personal, priceless liberties. Because if ever we put any other value above liberty and above principle, we shall lose both.
Now, my friends, I am not here to make a campaign speech. I was supposed to be down by the airplane to say goodbye to two of my very best friends in Government as they start on this pilgrimage--this campaign--for the benefit of the United States and the free world.
I believe they are--I repeat--the finest team that all America could have chosen for this effort. All of us wish for them Godspeed and good luck. And all of us--if I may speak now for you--each of you--pledge them our support, even the little girl who was wearing a badge which said: "If I were 21, I would vote for Nixon," right up to the oldest patriarch--this whole audience--because across the board we need good government, we need Nixon and Lodge.
Thank you very much and goodbye.
Note: The President spoke at 10:27 a.m. In the fourth paragraph he referred to David Blum, Republican candidate from the 7th Congressional District of Maryland.